arXiv:2402.08164v2 [stat.ML] 26 Feb 2024           On Limitations of the Transformer Architecture

                                                           Binghui Peng, Srini Narayananand Christos Papadimitriou

                                                                                      February 28, 2024

                                                                                                             Abstract

                                                       What are the root causes of hallucinations in large language models (LLMs)? We use Com-
                                                  munication Complexity to prove that the Transformer layer is incapable of composing functions
                                                  (e.g., identify a grandparent of a person in a genealogy) if the domains of the functions are large
                                                  enough; we show through examples that this inability is already empirically present when the
                                                  domains are quite small. We also point out that several mathematical tasks that are at the core
                                                  of the so-called compositional tasks thought to be hard for LLMs are unlikely to be solvable by
                                                  Transformers, for large enough instances and assuming that certain well accepted conjectures in
                                                  the field of Computational Complexity are true.

                                          1 Introduction

                                          The Transformer architecture [VSP+17], an otherwise singularly promising approach to AI, is known
                                          to be plagued by the problem of hallucinations: an answer to a user prompt is too often incompatible
                                          with the device's training data and prompt. There is now a vast literature on hallucinations and their
                                          nature, typology, and remedies, see for example the survey [JLF+23].

                                              Are there root causes of the hallucination phenomenon that can be imputed to the Transformer
                                          architecture? Theoretical limitations of Transformers have been pointed out in the past, starting with
                                          Hahn's 2020 paper [Hah20], where it was proved that Transformers cannot recognize simple patterns
                                          such as parity (e.g., whether a phrase contains an even number of negations) or balanced parentheses.
                                          However, the elegant proofs in [Hah20], inspired by Complexity Theory, are asymptotic in nature,
                                          and it appears that the proven limitations take hold only for unrealistically large inputs; in fact,
                                          it has been demonstrated that there are Transformers on which these functions can be computed
                                          reliably for all practical purposes [EGZ20, YPPN21]. Transformers have also been studied through
                                          Complexity Theory -- an important lens for understanding the limitations of computational systems
                                          -- culminating to [MS23b], where it was shown that, computationally, Transformers belong to a rather
                                          weak complexity class, namely logspace-uniform TC0; we elaborate on this point of view in Section 4.
                                          Also recently, Sanford, Hsu, and Telgarsky [SHT23] identified a particular mathematical problem called
                                          3-Matching, which cannot be computed by single-layer multi-head Transformers: Given a sequence of
                                          integers, identify three numbers in the sequence that add up to zero modulo a given large number.
                                          Very interestingly, (a) the easier problem of 2-Matching can be solved by Transformers, but cannot be
                                          solved by feed-forward deep nets, establishing a kind of supremacy of Transformers over the rest of
                                          ML; and (b) these negative results manifest themselves for rather small prompt sizes. Note that, the
                                          conceptual contribution of this result notwithstanding, the 3-matching function identified in [SHT23] is
                                          not a compelling example of the kinds of problems that Transformers are meant to solve. The question
                                          arises, can we identify impossible tasks that are closer to the intended use of the architecture? This is
                                          our focus here. We point out a new fundamental limitation of the Transformer architecture, namely
                                          that it has serious difficulties computing a very simple, and practically important, semantic operation
                                          we call function composition, explained next.

                                              In a recent paper on the topic of hallucinations [GLL+24], the opening example is a wrong an-
                                          swer to the question what is the birthday of Fr´ed´eric Chopin's father?, when these two facts
                                          were included in the prompt: (a) the father of Fr´ed´eric Chopin was Nicolas Chopin and (b)

                                              bp2601@columbia.edu
                                               srinin@google.com
                                               christos@columbia.edu

                                                                                                            1
Nicolas Chopin was born on April 15, 17711. This is an example of function composition, where
the functions to be composed are birthday-of and father-of. Interestingly, the aforementioned pa-
per [GLL+24] goes on to propose retrofitting Transformers with Knowledge Graphs -- precisely the
right tool for performing function composition -- in order to mitigate hallucinations. Another ex-
ample of function composition would be, given the facts London is in the UK, Alan Turing was
born in London, among other such facts, to ask: In which country was Turing born? Or, pre-
sented with Matthew's genealogy [Mat]: Abraham was the father of Isaac, Isaac was the the
father of Jacob, ... and so on with 39 more sentences of this type, to ask: Did Isaac have any
grandchildren?

    Besides its critical role in combining relational information in the data, function composition is
also an important ingredient of language understanding, the core competence of Transformers. In the
field of pragmatics, indexicals are words referring to entities in the context in which the utterance
occurs. For example his in the sentence I have a brother and his name is John, or this in
the sentence this dog has style are indexicals. Now, when in an utterance one indexical refers to
another, understanding the utterance entails function composition. Consider this:

       Transformers occasionally hallucinate, that is, they generate output inconsistent

       with the training data and prompt. However, this deficiency is rather rare,
       and techniques such as post-filtering can alleviate it.

    Understanding what is meant by the last word it of this utterance, one needs to compose two index-
icals: First one has to recognize that the indexical it points to this deficiency, and then that this
deficiency refers to the particular deficiency that Transformers occasionally hallucinate. It
appears that humans have little difficulty composing idexicals -- but how about Transformers?

    So it seems desirable -- indeed important -- that LLMs perform function composition reliably. In
this paper we prove that they cannot: function composition is an inherent weakness of the Transformer
architecture. In particular, we show that a single Transformer attention layer cannot compute the
answer to a function composition query correctly with significant probability of success, as long as the
size n of the domain of the function satisfies n log n > H(d + 1)p, where d is the embedding dimension,
p is the precision, in bits, required for the calculation, and H is the number of attention heads. In
fact, the proof of our impossibility theorem suggests that this weakness has its roots in the nature of
the softmax computation that allows the next embedding of a token to be computed with very scant
non-local information.

    Our impossibility result holds for a single, multi-headed attention layer; however, we suspect that
the weakness that it exposes also burdens multi-layer Transformers, and in Appendix A we see anec-
dotal evidence that LLMs appear unable to reliably compose functions with domains that are far
smaller.

    The chain of thought maneuver (CoT) [WWS+22] is known to help with the problem of hallucina-
tions by inducing the LLM to generate prompts which break down the task in hand into smaller steps
eventually leading to the correct answer. Indeed, a simple CoT scheme can plausibly mitigate our
impossibility result on composition by generating a short prompt. However, we also prove a theorem
implying that a Transformer layer with CoT needs far more tokens in the generated CoT prompt to
solve the composition problem for a cascade of many compositions (Theorem 2)

    We also provide a different impossibility argument that holds for any number of layers, and con-
cerns a different genre of hallucinations: wrong answers to compositionality tasks. In [DLS+23], it is
demonstrated through extensive experimentation that Transformers have trouble carrying out tasks
that require sequential composition of elementary tasks, such as multiplying multi-digit integers and
solving logical puzzles, and in fact this failure grows quickly with the required depth of composition.
We point out (Theorem 3) that, under a widely accepted complexity assumption -- akin to P = NP
albeit in the domain of memory -- multi-layer Transformers are incapable of performing several ele-
mentary computations that are crucial in carrying out compositionality tasks such as those discussed
in [DLS+23].

    Finally, it has been often pointed out that it is the very nature of Transformers as probabilistic
language generators that renders them likely to veer off their grounding on the training data and
prompt -- see for example [MYF+23], where it is demonstrated through extensive experimentation

    1It is a tragic coincidence that the great romantic composer Fr´ed´eric Chopin was tormented by hallucinatory episodes
throughout his brief life...

                                                                  2
that low-probability answers (as well as low-probability inputs, or low-probability tasks) are harder
for transformers to get right. In general, LLM models maximize the probability of generating the next
token given the context in an auto-regressive manner, and this must continue even when there is no
clear winner. That is, the LLM generates outputs even when the probability of the predicted token
is low. When this intensifies, the model will generate a low-likelihood series of tokens, resulting in an
unreliable output.

    There are many situations when this could happen. First, as [MYF+23] point out, LLM are
particularly bad when there is a low probability of the input, task, or output, even if the underlying
training sequence is deterministic. Yet another case is one where the input context is under-specified
or ambiguous. When the input context does not provide sufficient information for a clear and optimal
token choice, the estimated probabilities obtained from applying the logit function to the softmax
output of the transformer are distributed such that the difference between the highest and subsequent
probabilities is relatively small, there is a higher chance that in the auto-regressive model, the incorrect
token will be picked. This situation is also correlated to the case where the conditional entropy is likely
high. In all these cases, the generation of the incorrect token is more likely; and once the sequence has
an incorrect next token, there is a significant chance that this error cascades into a hallucination. In
a recent paper [KV23], this phenomenon is studied more formally by considering the statistics of very
rare patterns in the training data.

2 Preliminary definitions

Transformer. To model mathematically computation by Transformers, we adapt slightly the formal
model of [SHT23]. A self-attention unit is a function A : (RD)N  (Rd)N , where N is the sequence

length, D is the embedding dimension, and d is the output dimension. A is defined in terms of three
real matrices K, Q, V  Rd×D. For simplicity, we assume that the key, query, value matrices K, Q, V
share the same dimension. On input X = (x1, . . . , xN )  (RD)N , the attention unit A calculates, for
each i = 1, . . . , N , the output

                                 yi =         ri,j V xj  Rd                                  (1)

                                       j[N ]

where the attention probability

(ri,1, . . . , ri,N ) = softmax(xi QKx1, . . . , xi QKxN )

=                                 exp(xi QKx1)   xj  )  ,  .  .  .  ,   exp(xi QKxN )     .
                                 j[N] exp(xi QK                        j[N] exp(xi QKxj)

We assume that the computations of the self-attention unit are carried out with a precision of p bits.
    An H-headed transformer layer L consists of H self-attention units sharing the same input, together

with a combining function  which maps, for each i, the H outputs of the layer to an output token in
Rd. Finally, a Transformer T is the cascade of several transformer layers.

    Notice that our definition ignores certain features of the Transformer architecture, such as input
embedding and pre- and post-processing of individual tokens by feed-forward networks; however, it is
easy to see that input embedding and the pre-processing can be absorbed in the input tokens, while
post-processing can be incorporated into the combining function , and therefore, this omission does
not affect the validity of our argument.

Function composition. We next define the function composition problem. Consider two functions,
g mapping a domain A to a domain B, and f mapping B to another domain C -- for example, g(a)
could be the mother of person a  A, and f (b) is the profession of person b  B. These functions will
be described in a prompt X. The N tokens of X are divided into three parts:

    · Part 1. The first part describes the function g through |A| sentences in simple, unambigu-
       ous language separated by punctuation, e.g. the mother of John is Helen; the mother of
       Charlotte is Eve; etc.;

    · Part 2. Similarly, the second part consists of |B| sentences describing the function f , e.g. Helen
       is a doctor; Jane is a teacher; etc. and

                                              3
    · Part 3. The query, e.g. what is the profession of John's mother?2

    Notice that the number N of input tokens is a small multiple of the domain size of the functions.
We say that an H-headed Transformer layer L computes the function composition correctly if, for any
input prompt in the correct format, the output of the layer corresponding to the token of the query
(to the token John in this example) is the correct answer of the composition query.

    In the body of the paper we also introduce similar tasks, such as iterated function composition and
reachability, whose definitions are simple extensions of the above.

Information theory. We use standard notation from information theory. If X, Y, Z are random
variables, H(X) is the entropy of X and I(X; Y ) is the mutual information between X and Y . We
write ln(·) for the natural logarithm and log(·) for base two.

3 The Impossibility of Composition

We prove the following:

Theorem 1. Consider a function composition problem with input domain size |A| = |B| = |C| = n,

and an H-headed transformer layer L with embedding dimension d and computation precision p, and

assume that H(d + 1)p < n log n. Then L cannot solve correctly the function composition problem. In

particular, if R = n log n - H(d + 1)p > 0, then the probability, over all possible functions and queries,

that  L  answers          the  query  incorrectly  is  at  least  3n  R    n  .
                                                                      log

    The proof relies on Communication Complexity [KN96], a subfield of Complexity Theory in which
one measures the number of bits that need to be exchanged between distributed computational agents
possessing different parts of the input, in order for one of them to obtain the result of the computation.
The agents are assumed to have unbounded computational capabilities, and to be restricted only in
terms of their communication. One important classical result in Communication Complexity is the
communication difficulty of the set disjointness problem: If Bob and Alice are each given a vector of
n bits and they want to compute the Boolean inner product of these bit vectors -- that is, to tell if
there is an index i such that the ith bit of both Bob and Alice is a 1 -- then they must communicate
n bits. In fact, this result used is in the impossibility proofs in [SHT23]. Another classical problem in
this field is pointer chasing: Alice and Bob are given two functions A and B, respectively, from [n] to
[n], and they need to compute a composition of these functions, say A(B(A(B(A(0))))). Compositions
can obviously be computed by the agents alternatingly communicating log n bits to each other: in this
example, Alice communicates to Bob the value of A(0), then Bob tells Alice the value of B(A(0)),
and so on. But what if one less rounds of communication is allowed? Or, if the same number of
rounds is allowed, but Bob must start? Over the four decades since this problem was first posed
[PS82], it has been shown that, if one less round of communication is desired, or if Bob has to start
the communication, then exponentially more bits must be exchanged. These lower bounds have been
used to inform many fields of Complexity, including lower bounds of bounded-depth circuits, see for
example [KN96], and even the complexity of Machine Learning [CPP22].

    Here we use a slight variant of this classical framework. We assume three agents, whom we call
Faye, Grace, and Xavier. Faye knows a function f from [n] to [n], Grace knows another such function
g, and Xavier knows a number x  [n]. We can actually assume that Faye and Grace both know
Xavier's value x. The only communication allowed is from Faye and Grace to Xavier -- not between
Faye and Grace. Our goal is for Xavier to know the value f (g(x)) so that Faye communicates to Xavier
as few bits as possible. Notice that we do not restrict the number of bits Grace can communicate to
Xavier.

Lemma 1. If fewer than n log n bits are communicated by Faye to Xavier, then Xavier cannot know

the value f (g(x)). In particular, if only n log n-R bits are communicated from Faye to Xavier for some

R > 0, then the probability, over all pairs of functions, that the composition is computed incorrectly is

at  least  3n  R    n  .
               log

    2It is fine to think that these sentences come in this order, but the proof does not require it.

                                                                      4
Proof. The proof of the first statement of the lemma is elementary. Since Faye and Grace cannot

communicate, and communication from Grace to Xavier is free, we may assume that Grace communi-

cates to Xavier the value of g(x) -- intuitively, the only information he needs from her. Even though

progress seems to have been made, Xavier must now apply f to g(x), and he knows nothing about f .

This difficulty must be solved through communication from Faye to Xavier, as further communication
from Grace obviously cannot help. There are nn possible functions f , and to describe the actual one
completely Faye needs to send Xavier at least n log n bits, the logarithm base two of nn -- in fact

nlog n bits suffice, because Faye can send to Xavier the values f (0), f (1), ... in this order. If Faye

sends to Xavier fewer than n log n bits, say B bits, the precise bitstring she sends is determined by the
function f she knows, and thus this communication subdivides the nn candidates for the f function
into 2B categories -- one for each value of the B bits sent by Faye to Xavier. Since B < n log n, we
have that 2B < nn, and hence, by the pigeonhole principle, at least two different candidate functions
f and f  result in the same communication from Faye to Xavier, and Xavier has no way of knowing

which of the two functions is the correct one. These two functions must differ in at least one value,
say f (z) = f (z). But what if it so happens that g(x) = z? In this case, Xavier has no way of knowing

the correct answer to the problem he is supposed to solve, completing the proof of the first statement.

    The proof of the second, quantitative, statement is more technical and relies on Information Theory
and mutual information3. Recall the input of Grace is a random mapping g : [n]  [n], for any fixed
input of Xavier x  [n]. Let i = g(x)  [n], then we know that i is uniform over [n]. Let  be the

message sent from Faye to Xavier, it has n log(n) - R bits. We first bound the mutual information
between  and f (i) = f (g(x)):

                                                                      n

                                     I(; f (i)|i) = Pr[i = i] · I(; f (i)|i = i)

                                                              i=1

                                                              1   n
                                                              n
                                                           =                I(; f (i))

                                                                  i=1

                                                              1   n
                                                              n
                                                                            I(; f (i)|(f (j))j<i)

                                                                  i=1

                                                              1   n
                                                              n
                                                           =                I(; f (1), . . . , f (n))

                                                                  i=1

                                                              ||      =     log n -  R   .                                                               (2)
                                                               n                     n

The first step follows from the definition of conditional mutual information. The second step follows
from the facts that i is uniform over [n] and  is independent of i. The third step follows from

(f (j))j<i are independent of f (i), and the fourth step is the chain rule.
    Notice that Xavier's output is just a post-processing of  and i, and denote by  its error proba-

bility. Then by Fano's Inequality, we have

     H ()  +      log(n)        H(f (i)|, i)         =     H(f (i)|i)        -  I(; f (i)|i)               log n    -   (log n  -  R  )  =    R  .       (3)
                                                                                                                                   n          n

Here the first step follows from Fano's inequality, the third step follows from Eq. (2).

    From   Eq.      (3),   we  can   derive    that          3n  R    n  .
                                                                 log

Remark        1.    The    lower     bound     on   the    error  probability        in     the  statement          of  the  Lemma,         3n   R    n  ,  is
                                                                                                                                                 log

optimal  within     a small     constant     factor.     In  proof,      an  upper    bound      of   1      R      is  possible,  by    the  following
                                                                                                      n    log n

construction (we assume n is a power of 2 for simplicity): Faye sends to Xavier n log n - R bits, by

which    she  encodes      the  the  first  n  -      R      values      of  the  function.      With      this   scheme,    an    error    happens         if
                                                    log n

one  of  the  last      R       values   of    the  function      is  queried,    and       answered       the    wrong   way.     This     probability
                      log n

is  at  most  1       R    ,  which  is  just  a    factor    of  three      greater  than       the  lower       bound.
              n     log n

    We now turn to the proof of the theorem.

    3Strictly speaking, the second statement implies the first; however, the simple proof of the first statement is included
for reasons of exposition.

                                                                             5
Proof. For the purposes of contradiction, suppose that there is a self-attention layer L that can reliably
combine any two functions f and g on any domains A, B, C of size n, such that n log n > H(d + 1)p.
We will show that this contradicts Lemma 1.

    Suppose that the three agents Faye, Grace, and Xavier are as in the lemma, and they wish to
compute f (g(x)); we claim that they could do so by using L as follows: They put together the prompt
of a function composition problem to be solved by L, where Faye supplies the token strings associated
with function f -- say, the value of f applied to 0 is 3, etc. Grace supplies similarly the tokens
associated with function g, and Xavier supplies the query part: what is the result of f applied
to g applied to 23? -- recall that Xavier knows x, and it happens to be 23. We assume the token
corresponding to 23 is token t, that is, xt = 23. Then the three agents compute the result of the
computation of L that corresponds to the token t, as explained below. Recall that, by our assumption
that L performs function composition, this result must be the required answer f (g(x)).

    The three agents communicate to compute, for each head, the final embedding that corresponds to
the token t, and then Xavier applies the finishing function  to compute the final result, which will
be the answer of the composition problem. For each head, the result at token N can be written as

                              yt =      N     rt,j  V  xj  ,  where  rt,j  =  exp(xt QK xj ).                                 (4)
                                        j=1

                                         N    rt,j
                                         j=1

The  key  observation    now  is  that  this  expression      can    be  written  as  yt  =   F +G+X    ,  where  F  is  the  part
                                                                                             F +G+X
of the numerator that corresponds to Faye's tokens xj , similarly G corresponds to Grace's tokens,

X corresponds to Xavier's tokens, and similarly for the denominator. Hence, Faye can compute and

communicate to Xavier quantities F and F , and similarly for Grace and G, G; then Xavier can add

to these the terms X and X, divide, and thus compute yN . Repeating for all heads and combining
with , Xavier can compute f (g(x)) and obtain the desired answer to the composition problem. But

now notice that this was accomplished through a communication of only H(d + 1)p bits from Faye to

Xavier -- dp bits for F and p bits for F  for each of the H heads. By hypothesis, this quantity is

less than n log n, contradicting Lemma 1. The second part on error probability follows from the same

reduction, completing the proof.

Remark 2. The proof of the probabilistic statement assumes that f is a uniformly random function
from [n] to [n]. To prove a negative result, some probabilistic assumption is necessary; for example, if
f (x) happens to be a for all x, far fewer bits need be communicated from Faye to Xavier. The statement
can be extended to cover more general distributions, but then the entropy of f would replace n log n in
the denominator of the statement.

Remark 3. It is clear from the proof that function g plays a minimal role in the lower bound, since its
value on x is communicated for free to Xavier. Indeed, one can argue that what is proved impossible for
the Transformer layer is the evaluation of a function f . The reasoning in the proof of the Theorem can
be repeated for prompts which, after listing the birthplaces of many luminaries end like this: ``...where
was Einstein born?'', as long as the answer must appear at the position of the last token.

Chain of Thought

Can CoT help solve the composition problem? Intuitively, the answer is "yes." For any composition
problem -- for example, the prompt about Turing, London, and England in the introduction -- we can
help the LLM successfully answer the question ``In which country was Turing born?'' by gen-
erating a short CoT prompt that breaks the question into simpler ones, e.g. ``Let's see, Turing was

born in generate, and generate is in the country of generate, so Turing was born in
generate.'' However, we prove below that an arbitrarily large number of CoT steps are needed to
solve the generalization of composition to many function applications. In the iterated function compo-
sition problem we are given K functions f1, f2, . . . , fK, and we need to calculate fK (fk-1(. . . (f1(x))))
for x  [n]. In fact, in our proof we shall consider f (K)(x) = f (f (. . . f (x))) -- that is, we shall take
f1 = · · · = fK.

Theorem 2. Let H be the number of attention heads, d the embedding dimension, p the computation

precision, and n be the domain size of the iterated composition problem. A Transformer layer requires

(      n  )  CoT  steps  for  answering  correctly         iterated  function  composition   prompts.
     Hdp

                                                              6
Proof. We reduce from another classical problem in Communication Complexity called pointer chasing.

Let n and c be two positive integers. In the (n, c)-pointer chasing problem, Alice knows a function
fA : [n]  [n] and Bob knows another function fB : [n]  [n]. The pointers w(1), w(2), . . . are
recursively defined as

w(1) = 1, w(2) = fA(w(1)), w(3) = fB(w(2)), w(4) = fA(w(3)), w(5) = fB(w(4)), . . .

    The communication proceeds for 2r rounds, with Alice starting. The goal is for Bob to output the
binary value of w(2r+2) (mod 2). The following summarizes what is known about this problem:

Lemma 2 ([NW91, Kla00, Yeh20]). Any randomized protocol for the pointer chasing problem with
error probability at most 1/3 under the uniform distribution must involve the transmission of at least
n/(2000c) - 2c log n.

Lemma 3. For any K  1, suppose there is a Transformer layer L with H attention heads, dimension
d, and precision p that solves the K-iterated function composition within R CoT steps, then there is
a communication protocol for (n, K - 1)-pointer chasing, communicates in 2R rounds and exchanges
2RH(d + 1)p bits.

Proof. Recall that in the pointer chasing problem, Alice receives a function fA : [n]  [n] and Bob
receives a function fB : [n]  [n]. Define a single mapping f : [2n]  [2n] such that

                          f (i) =    fA(i) + n            i  [n]
                                     fB(i - n)       i  [n + 1 : 2n]

For any i  [n], we have that f (k)(i) = (fB  fA)(k)(i) holds for any integer k  1.
    Suppose there is a Transformer layer L that solves the K-iterated function composition problem

using R CoT steps; we shall construct a communication protocol for pointer chasing based on it. Alice
and Bob put together the function composition task for L, where Alice supplies the description of

f (1), . . . , f (n), using her knowledge of fA, and Bob supplies the description of f (n + 1), . . . , f (2n),
using his knowledge of fB. For simplicity, we assume the i-th input token, xi, contains the information
of f (i), for any i  [2n]; the query x2n+1 appears at position 2n + 1 and it asks for f (K)(1). Let
Kh, Qh, Vh be the key, query, value matrices of the h-th attention head.

    The communication protocol proceeds in 2R rounds, where the 2r - 1, 2r rounds simulate the r-th

step of CoT. Formally, for r = 1, 2, . . . , R, the protocol proceeds as follows:

· At round 2r - 1, for each attention head h  [H], Alice computes i[n] exp(x2n+rQhKhxi)  R
   and i[n](x2n+rQhKhxi)Vhxi  Rd, and sends them to Bob;

· At round 2r, for each attention head h  [H], Bob computes i[n+1:2n] exp(x2n+rQh Khxi)  R,
      i[n+1:2n] exp(x2n+rQh Khxi)Vhxi  Rd and sends them to Alice;

· Alice and Bob compute, locally, the output y2n+r,h (h  [H]) as

y2n+r,h =            i[2n] exp(x2n+r QhKhxi)Vhxi + i[r] exp(x2n+r Qh Khx2n+i)Vhx2n+i
                             i[2n] exp(x2n+r Qh Khxi) + i[r] exp(x2n+rQhKhx2n+i)

       and the next token x2n+r+1 = (y2n+r,1, . . . , y2n+r,H )

After 2R rounds, Bob knows the output of R-fold CoT, and can compute f (K)(1) = (fB fA)(K)(1), this
resolves the (n, K -1)-pointer chasing task. The total number of bits communicated are 2R·H(d+1)p,
as required by the lemma.

Combining  Lemma  2  and  Lemma  3,  and  taking  K  =   1     n  ,  we  complete  the  proof  of  theorem.
                                                        100  Hdp

                                          7
4 Compositionality and Logarithmic Space

In a recent paper [DLS+23] a novel genre of hallucinations was identified: extensive experimental
evidence is presented that Transformers perform poorly on compositional tasks, that is, tasks requiring
the repeated iteration of elementary tasks; similar phenomena have been observed elsewhere [MS23b,
FGZ+23, MS23a]. The main examples of compositional4 tasks explored in [DLS+23] are:

    · multiplication of multi-digit integers modeled as an arithmetic circuit with single-digit values
       and inputs;

    · a simple sum maximization problem over a sequence of integers under the restriction that two
       successive integers cannot be both added to the sum; this again can be reduced through dynamic
       programming to an arithmetic circuit with plus and max gates; and

    · Logic puzzles such as "Einstein's Riddle"5

    Wrong answers to large families of simple questions such as these constitute a special category of
hallucinations, and it is of interest to explore its causes. It turns out that, to do so, we must turn the
page of our negative results of the previous section and Communication Complexity arguments, and
employ the theory of Computational Complexity [Pap93, AB09] to study certain basic computational
problems underlying the tasks studied in [DLS+23]:

Circuit evaluation: Given the description of a circuit with gates, which can be either Boolean or
arithmetic operations, as well as the values of all input gates of the circuit, evaluate the output(s) of
the circuit. Multiplying decimal integers with multiple digits is an example of such a circuit; solving
the adjacency-restricted largest sum problem of [DLS+23] is also the evaluation of a circuit, this time
with + and max gates.

Derivability is yet another generalization of our composition task of the previous section which we
believe captures many aspects of the informal notion of compositionality. We are given a finite domain
S -- intuitively, the partial solutions of the problem in hand -- and a relation D  S × S -- intuitively,
legal one-step derivations. We are also given two subsets of S, I (for initial partial solutions) and F
(for final partial solutions). The question is: are there elements a1, a2, . . . , ak  S such that (a) a0  I;
(b) ak  F , and (c) for all j such that 0 < j  k, D(aj-1, aj)?

Logical reasoning: Logic puzzles can be typically formulated as instances of satisfiability (or SAT).
This problem is NP-complete and, even though large instances arising in practice can be solved by
sophisticated techniques developed over decades of research, it would not be surprising if LLMs may
have problems in dealing with arbitrary logical expressions. There are, however, three tractable special
cases of SAT that underlie much of tractable common-sense reasoning: 2-SAT, the satisfiability of CNF
formulas with two literals in each clause; Horn SAT, the corresponding problem for Horn clauses, that
is, clauses with at most one positive literal; and Mod 2 SAT, the solution of a system of linear equations
modulo 2. Note that these are the only nontrivial tractable special cases of SAT. Can we expect LLMs
to handle them?

We point out below that, assuming certain well accepted conjectures in Computational Complexity,
all of these tasks are impossible for a multi-layer Transformer to perform reliably and for large enough
prompts. We start with the following:

Observation 1. The computation of a multi-layer Transformer on a prompt of length N can be carried
out with O(log N ) bits of memory.

    This is not a new result; it has been recently established in [MS23b] that the computation of
Transformers lies in the complexity class log-uniform TC0, which is more restrictive than logarithmic
memory; in fact, the implications of this result for the capabilities of Transformers are also briefly

    4We note here that, despite the obvious linguistic affinity of the two terms "composition" studied in the previous
section and the "compositionality" of [DLS+23], the two terms are further than they seem. Compositionality is an
informal category that is vastly more general than composition, which is a specific mathematical concept.

    5https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zebra_Puzzle

                                                                  8
discussed in [MS23b]. However, we feel that the simple arguments we present here, both for proving
the Observation and point out its connections to compositionality tasks, are simple, intuitive and
useful.

    The Observation is not hard to verify for a single Transformer layer: In each head of each layer
of a Transformer, one only has to compute the next layer embedding yi for each token, through the
formula in Equation (1). This formula can be computed by a program with two loops over i and j, both
ranging over all N tokens. These loops nest three more loops over d, D and the Taylor iteration for
computing the exponentiation function. Since the precision of all numbers involved is logarithmic with
respect to the problem size N (the prompt length), everything else, including arithmetic operations,
can be carried out with log(N ) memory.

    This observation can be made more formal by defining a Turing machine with an input tape
containing the data of the computation (the N tokens and the entries of the matrices Q, K, V ), as
well as six work tapes: Two for maintaining the indices i and j, three for the indices ranging over [d]
and [D] and one for the partial results of the arithmetic operations; the work tapes, taken together,
use a total number of bits that is O(log N ). When there are multiple attention heads, as long as
the combination function  can be carried out also in log-space (which is true for both finite-depth
neural networks as well as matrix-vector multiplication), the output at each token can be computed
in logarithmic space.

    So far we have argued that, given access to the input tokens and the attention matrices, the
computation of the first layer can be carried out in logarithmic space. To extend this to two layers,
recall that the computation of the second layer is just like that of the first, except that access to
the outputs yi of the first layer is needed, instead of the input tokens. This can also be performed
in O(log N ) space by recomputing, in a separate set of tapes, the yi values one by one as needed by
the computation of the second layer -- incidentally, this recomputation maneuver is a common way
of saving memory by exploiting a memory-time trade-off. In the same way, any constant number of
layers can be computed in logarithmic space, through nested loops. The number of layers will appear
as a multiplicative constant of the space requirement of the computation, as well as in the exponent of
the time requirement.

    It follows that the computation of a multi-layer Transformer belongs in the complexity class L
standing for logarithmic space [Pap93, AB09].

    Now, next to the paramount P = NP conjecture about time complexity, there is another important,
classical, and also broadly accepted analogous conjecture about memory: L = NL. It states that
nondeterministic logarithmic memory is more powerful than its deterministic counterpart [Pap93,
AB09]. Just as NP has complete problems, such as SAT, which witness its conjectured difference
from P, there are NL-complete problems, and two of the best known among them are 2-SAT and
Derivability (classically known as Reachability). Circuit evaluation and Horn-SAT are even harder:
they are both complete for P, which includes NL.

    We summarize the previous discussion as follows:

Theorem 3. The four problems of Derivability, 2-SAT, Horn SAT, and Circuit evaluation cannot be
solved by multi-layer Transformers unless L = NL. In fact, for the latter two problems the result is
true unless the stronger statement L = P holds. For Mod 2 SAT, the result is true unless the weaker
statement L = Mod 2 L holds.

    We believe that this theorem goes a long way towards explaining the shortcomings of Transformers
identified in [DLS+23], given the affinity between the problems proved impossible above and the
tasks studied in that paper. Importantly, it is demonstrated experimentally in [DLS+23] that the
performance of Transformers on these tasks deteriorates rapidly as the depth of the task increases.
This is in good agreement with our complexity explanation, because the relevant complexity results
kick in only when the depth is larger than log N -- for compositional tasks of depth smaller than that,
it is not hard to see that logarithmic memory is enough.

5 Discussion

We used complexity arguments of two different genres -- Communication Complexity and Computa-
tional Complexity -- in order to elucidate certain shortcomings of the transformer architecture, namely

                                                                  9
an information bottleneck as well as difficulties in dealing with depth. We showed that the elemen-
tary function composition problem cannot be solved by a single Transformer layer, and that CoT can
solve the iterated composition problem only by generating a prompt that has length ( N ). These
mathematical results are limited in two ways: (a) they take hold when the domain size is larger than
the dimension parameters (which are typically in the hundreds), and (b) they break down for multiple
layers. We also provide evidence from Complexity Theory -- of the classical Turing machine variety --
that the compositionality tasks known empirically to be hard for Transformers contain computational
ingredients and primitives that are impossible for Transformers to deal with.

    The reader is reminded that the complexity arguments we employ here come with caveats. The
impossibility result for composition holds for a single layer, in a probabilistic way (the error probability
is nonzero but not one), and only when the domain of the functions is larger than the parameters of
the Transformer layer. The results based on Computational Complexity come with a different set of
caveats: They hold only if certain yet unproven, if widely accepted, conjectures are true, and even
then they are asymptotic, holding for instances larger than an unknown size, for which the assumed
asymptotic conjectures take effect. Complexity results such as these are mere warnings that these
problems have a fundamental incompatibility with with the Transformer architecture, and therefore
one should not expect that these problems to be solvable in practice ad infinitum. However, as with
other complexity conjectures such as P = NP, it is often the case that computational difficulties
start happening for instances of reasonably small size. For example, we already know [DLS+23] that
Transformers have difficulties with compositionality tasks of rather small sizes, and in Appendix A
we present anecdotal evidence that LLMs often respond erroneously to prompts of small sizes related
to function composition. Naturally, the opposite phenomenon is also common: some NP-complete
problems such as 3SAT seem to be amenable to efficient solutions in practice for very large instances;
however, this is typically accomplished by extensive exploration over decades of a large arsenal of
algorithmic techniques relying on the kinds of instances that appear in practice, and not through a
fixed algorithmic architecture.

    The real tragedy of complexity lower bounds is not their tentative and asymptotic nature; it is that
(a) they are rare and hard to come by, and they come in very few known kinds; and (b) they tend
to be overly conservative, in that they often vastly overestimate the capabilities of the computational
agents they are trying to delimit. Lemma 1 is a good example: it is designed to hold even if Grace uses
the most sophisticated math to encode her input into her message. But when the lemma is applied in
Theorem 1, Grace is very restricted, in that her message to Xavier is not a clever coding of her tokens,
but the two particular simple numerical expressions that we call G and G in the proof. It is intuitively
clear that this computation -- the token values projected, exponentiated, and then cross-multiplied
and averaged -- is a very poor way to encode the n values of function g so that Xavier can recover
each one of them readily. This observation highlights an interesting open problem, the opportunity
to develop a more sophisticated variant of Communication Complexity for computationally restricted
agents in order to study the limitations of devices such as the Transformer.

    Finally, our two genres of negative results suggest an intriguing challenge: What would it take to
design a different attention layer that is immune to these two lower bound techniques, while maintaining
the architecture's efficiency and effectiveness in practice? Our proof suggests a version of the softmax
computation in the attention layer that is either not commutative or not associative, or one that
requires more than logarithmic space. But, of course, simply evading a lower bound technique does
not guarantee a tangible improvement in performance...

Acknowledgment: We are grateful to Fernando Pereira for his insights, engagement, and construc-
tive critiques throughout this project. Thanks also to Olivier Bousquet for many insightful comments
on an earlier draft. This work was done when the third author was a visiting scientist at Google
DeepMind in Zurich. The work of the first and third authors was partially supported by an NSF
grant.

                                                                 10
References

[AB09]    Sanjeev Arora and Boaz Barak. Computational complexity: a modern approach. Cambridge
          University Press, 2009.

[CPP22]   Xi Chen, Christos Papadimitriou, and Binghui Peng. Memory bounds for continual learn-
          ing. In 2022 IEEE 63rd Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS),
          pages 519­530. IEEE, 2022.

[DLS+23] Nouha Dziri, Ximing Lu, Melanie Sclar, Xiang Lorraine Li, Liwei Jiang, Bill Yuchen Lin,
                Peter West, Chandra Bhagavatula, Ronan Le Bras, Jena D Hwang, et al. Faith and fate:
                Limits of transformers on compositionality. 2023.

[EGZ20]   Javid Ebrahimi, Dhruv Gelda, and Wei Zhang. How can self-attention networks recognize
          dyck-n languages? In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP
          2020, pages 4301­4306, 2020.

[FGZ+23] Guhao Feng, Yuntian Gu, Bohang Zhang, Haotian Ye, Di He, and Liwei Wang. Towards
                revealing the mystery behind chain of thought: a theoretical perspective. 2023.

[GLL+24] Xinyan Guan, Yanjiang Liu, Hongyu Lin, Yaojie Lu, Ben He, Xianpei Han, and Le Sun.
                Mitigating large language model hallucinations via autonomous knowledge graph-based
                retrofitting. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2024.

[Hah20] Michael Hahn. Theoretical limitations of self-attention in neural sequence models. Trans-
                actions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 8:156­171, 2020.

[JLF+23]  Ziwei Ji, Nayeon Lee, Rita Frieske, Tiezheng Yu, Dan Su, Yan Xu, Etsuko Ishii, Ye Jin
          Bang, Andrea Madotto, and Pascale Fung. Survey of hallucination in natural language
          generation. ACM Computing Surveys, 55(12):1­38, 2023.

[Kla00]   Hartmut Klauck. On quantum and probabilistic communication: Las vegas and one-
          way protocols. In Proceedings of the thirty-second annual ACM symposium on Theory of
          computing, pages 644­651, 2000.

[KN96]    Eyal Kushilevitz and Noam Nisan. Communication complexity. Cambridge University
          Press, 1996.

[KV23]    Adam Tauman Kalai and Santosh S Vempala. Calibrated language models must halluci-
          nate. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.14648, 2023.

[Mat]     Holy Bible, Matthew 1, 1­17.

[MS23a] William Merrill and Ashish Sabharwal. The expresssive power of transformers with chain
                of thought. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.07923, 2023.

[MS23b]   William Merrill and Ashish Sabharwal. The parallelism tradeoff: Limitations of log-
          precision transformers. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
          11:531­545, 2023.

[MYF+23] R Thomas McCoy, Shunyu Yao, Dan Friedman, Matthew Hardy, and Thomas L Griffiths.
                Embers of autoregression: Understanding large language models through the problem they
                are trained to solve. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.13638, 2023.

[NW91]    Noam Nisan and Avi Widgerson. Rounds in communication complexity revisited. In
          Proceedings of the 23rd Annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing, pages 419­429,
          1991.

[Pap93] Christos H Papadimitriou. Computational complexity. Addison-Wesley, 1993.

[PS82]    Christos H Papadimitriou and Michael Sipser. Communication complexity. In Proceedings
          of the 14th Annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing, pages 196­200, 1982.

                                        11
[SHT23] Clayton Sanford, Daniel Hsu, and Matus Telgarsky. Representational strengths and limi-
                tations of transformers. 2023.

[VSP+17] Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N
                Gomez, Lukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural
                information processing systems, 30, 2017.

[WWS+22] Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc V
                Le, Denny Zhou, et al. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language
                models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:24824­24837, 2022.

[Yeh20]   Amir Yehudayoff. Pointer chasing via triangular discrimination. Combinatorics, Probabil-
          ity and Computing, 29(4):485­494, 2020.

[YPPN21]  Shunyu Yao, Binghui Peng, Christos Papadimitriou, and Karthik Narasimhan. Self-
          attention networks can process bounded hierarchical languages. In Proceedings of the
          59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the 11th In-
          ternational Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers),
          pages 3770­3785, 2021.

          12
A Examples

We show here a few qualitative results that illustrate the difficulty of composition for state-of-the-art
LLMs. A full empirical exposition for the case of compositional failures can be found in [DLS+23].
The experiments here are conducted on GPT 3.5, GPT 4 and Bard. The prompts used involve simple
composition over spatial, temporal or relationship relations. The experiments were performed before
Jan 21st, 2024. We allow all three LLMs to perform step-by-step reasoning, and we only show their
final answer. The answers displayed are typical.
Spatial composition When the prompt involves spatial information, transformer based systems
appear to have problems with composition, see examples in Figure 1.
Temporal composition Figure 2 shows two simple cases where temporal composition fails and all
the state-of-the-art models return incorrect answers.
Relationship composition We also see incorrect and hallucinatory answers when the prompt in-
volves the composition of relationship information, see the two examples in Figure 3.

    Prompt: Fayes is to the west of Xaive, Jill is to the north of Ken, Fayes is to the south of
    Ken, where is Ken with respect to Xaive?
    GPT 3.5: East
    GPT 4: Northeast
    Bard: Not enough information
    Correct answer: Northwest

    Prompt: If Amy is to the southwest of Ben, Cindy is to the northeast of Amy and directly
    north of Ben, is Amy further from Ben or Cindy?
    GPT 3.5: Ben
    GPT 4: Ben
    Bard: Ben
    Correct answer: Cindy

                             Figure 1: Spatial composition produces incorrect answers

                                                                 13
Prompt: Jan's birthday is one year after Nancy, Nancy is older than John by seven years.
What's the age different between Jan and John?
GPT 3.5: 8 days
GPT 4: 8 years
Bard: 8 years
Correct answer: 6 years

Prompt: Alice is the younger sister of Bob, Bob is the elder brother of Tim. Is Alice younger
than Tim?
GPT 3.5: Yes
GPT 4: Yes
Bard: Yes
Correct answer: Not enough information

                             Figure 2: Hallucinations in temporal composition

Prompt: Aig is the son of Bef, Caf is the son of Aig. Does Aig have any grandchildren?
GPT 3.5: Yes
GPT 4: Yes
Bard: Yes
Correct answer: Not enough information.

Prompt: Aya is the father of Bob, Charlie is the father of Cindy, Bob is the mother of Cindy.
Does Aya have a grandchild?
GPT 3.5: Not enough information
GPT 4: Yes
Bard: No
Correct answer: Yes

                           Figure 3: Hallucinations in relationship composition

                                                            14
