                                                  A Little Depth Goes a Long Way:
                                       The Expressive Power of Log-Depth Transformers

                                          William Merrill         Ashish Sabharwal
                                       Allen Institute for AI    Allen Institute for AI
                                       willm@allenai.org       ashishs@allenai.org

arXiv:2503.03961v3 [cs.LG] 5 Nov 2025                                              Abstract

                                                  Recent theoretical results show transformers cannot express sequential reasoning
                                                  problems over long inputs, intuitively because their computational depth is bounded.
                                                  However, prior work treats the depth as a constant, leaving it unclear to what
                                                  degree bounded depth may suffice for solving problems over short inputs, or how
                                                  increasing the transformer's depth affects its expressive power. We address these
                                                  questions by analyzing transformers whose depth can grow minimally with context
                                                  length n. We show even highly uniform transformers with depth (log n) can
                                                  express two important problems: recognizing regular languages, which captures
                                                  state tracking abilities and was known to be expressible only by an unconventional,
                                                  non-uniform model of transformers, and graph connectivity, which underlies multi-
                                                  step reasoning. Notably, both of these problems cannot be expressed by fixed-depth
                                                  transformers under standard complexity conjectures, demonstrating the expressivity
                                                  benefit of growing depth. Moreover, our theory quantitatively predicts how depth
                                                  must grow with input length to express these problems, showing that depth scaling
                                                  is more efficient than scaling width or chain-of-thought steps. Empirically, our
                                                  detailed experiments designed to bridge the expressivity vs. learnability gap reveal
                                                  that our theoretical depth requirements for regular language recognition closely
                                                  match the practical depth requirements for successfully training transformers. Thus,
                                                  our results clarify how depth affects a transformer's reasoning capabilities, and
                                                  provide practical guidance for effective depth selection for sequential reasoning.

                                       1 Introduction

                                       A line of recent work analyzing the intrinsic computational power of transformers, the neural
                                       architecture behind today's immensely successful large language models (LLMs), has established
                                       that, with fixed depth, transformers cannot express many simple problems outside the complexity
                                       class TC0, including recognizing regular languages and resolving connectivity of nodes in a graph
                                       (Merrill and Sabharwal, 2023a; Chiang et al., 2023). These problems conceivably underlie many
                                       natural forms of sequential reasoning, such as state tracking (Liu et al., 2023; Merrill et al., 2024)
                                       and resolving logical inferences across long chains (Wei et al., 2022). Thus, these results suggest
                                       inherent limitations on the types of reasoning transformer classifiers can perform. Yet, these findings
                                       come with an important caveat: even if transformers cannot solve such problems exactly for inputs of
                                       arbitrary lengths, they may still be able to solve them over inputs up to some bounded length. This
                                       perspective, coupled with the fact that treating depth as fixed is crucial to prior analyses placing
                                       transformers in TC0, motivates two related questions about depth as an important resource for a
                                       transformer, in relation to the context length over which it reasons:

                                              1. Bounded Context: If fixed-depth transformers cannot theoretically express certain problems
                                                  over unbounded context lengths, can they still express them over bounded but still practically

                                           Work partially conducted as a PhD student at New York University.

                                       39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).
   "large enough" contexts? Can we quantitatively characterize the context length up to which
   transformers are effective for different problems as a function of their depth?

2. Dynamic Depth: Can minimally scaling the depth of a transformer allow it to solve such
   problems for arbitrarily long inputs? How does this compare in efficiency to scaling width
   (i.e., model dimension) or scaling inference-time compute via chain-of-thought steps?

We address these questions by analyzing the expressive power of "universal" transformers (also called
"looped" transformers) where a fixed model is given dynamic depth by repeating a block of middle
layers a variable number of times (Dehghani et al., 2019; Yang et al., 2024; Geiping et al., 2025). We
capture the regime where depth grows minimally with context length, with the middle layers repeated
(log n) times on contexts of length n. We prove that even such highly uniform transformers, when
allowed log-depth, can recognize regular languages2 and solve graph connectivity, two important
reasoning problems known to be beyond fixed-depth transformers (Merrill and Sabharwal, 2023a).
Our core technical contribution enabling this is Lemma 1, that fully uniform transformers can compute
division and remainder of small integers. This not only obviates the need for non-uniformity and
special positional encodings relied upon in prior work, it is also an interesting finding on its own.

Our result has two interesting interpretations.                           Depth, width, and CoT efficiency for regular language recognition
First, it directly shows that, by dynamically in-                        500

creasing their depth as (log n) on inputs of                             400

length n, one can construct transformers to solve

regular language recognition (Theorem 1) and          required resource                                  scaled resource
graph connectivity (Theorem 2) for arbitrary 300                                                               width
                                                                                                               CoT steps
context length. In contrast, chain-of-thought                                                                  depth
(CoT) steps, used for additional test-time com- 200

pute by newest LLMs such as OpenAI o1

(OpenAI, 2024) and DeepSeek-R1 (DeepSeek 100

AI, 2025), must be scaled superlogarithmically

(Theorem 4) to solve these problems, and width                           00   100  2c0o0ntext len3g0t0h  400  500
must be scaled superpolynomially (Theorem 3),

as shown in Figure 1. Thus scaling depth more
efficiently allows solving these reasoning prob- Figure 1: To recognize a regular language over
lems compared to scaling width or using CoT. inputs of length n, the depth of a universal trans-
                                                   former can grow (log n) by Theorem 1. On the
Second, a universal transformer unrolled to a other hand, width must grow superpolynomially
fixed (independent of input size) depth d is a (Theorem 3), and the number of chain-of-thought
special case of a standard d-depth transformer, steps must be superlogarithmic (Theorem 4). The
namely one with a highly uniform structure (pa- precise depth and width coefficients plotted here
rameters shared across layers). Thus, our result were obtained experimentally in Section 7.
shows that standard transformers with a fixed

depth d can recognize regular languages (Corollary 1.2) and solve graph connectivity problems

(Corollary 2.1) as long as one cares only about bounded inputs of size 2O(d). This allows us to

quantify how many layers are necessary for a desired input size. For instance, Corollaries 2.1 and 1.2

imply that with a depth of only 32, such as in LLaMA 3.1 7B (Meta AI, 2024) and OLMo 7B (Ai2,

2024), transformers can recognize regular languages up to strings of length 107 and solve connectivity

for graphs with up to 128 vertices. A depth of 80 (such as in LLaMA 3.1 70B) makes these input

size limits practically unbounded: strings of length up to 440K and graphs with up to 2.1B vertices.

Empirically, our experiments supplementing our theoretical findings demonstrate that scaling depth

as (log n) is necessary and sufficient for learning to recognize hard regular languages.3

We hope these findings serve as actionable guidance for practitioners to choose effective model
depths for reasoning over long contexts, and motivate further exploration of dynamic depth as an
inference-time compute strategy for transformer based LLMs.

    2While Liu et al. (2023) provided a similar result, their construction relied heavily on an unconventional,
non-uniform transformer architecture, requiring a different set of model weights for each input length. In
contrast, our result holds in a stronger setting of highly uniform transformers--where model weights are not
only fixed (independent of input length) as in practice but even shared across blocks of layers, enabling effective
inference-time scaling. Our formal model incorporates standard architectural choices like residual connection
and layer norm. We supplement our stronger theoretical findings with matching empirical learnability results.

    3Code: https://github.com/jopetty/word-problem/tree/willm/log-depth/log-depth.

                                                   2
2 Preliminaries: Universal Transformers

We consider (s, r, t)-universal transformers, which are defined to have s fixed initial layers at
the start, a sequence of r layers that is repeated some number of times based on the input length,
and a sequence of t fixed final/terminal layers. Thus, an (s, r, t)-universal transformer unrolled
d(n) times for input length n has a total of s + rd(n) + t layers. Geiping et al. (2025) empirically
explored such transformers for scaling test-time computation for reasoning problems. A standard
d-layer transformer is (d, 0, 0)-universal (equivalently, (0, 0, d)-universal), while a standard universal
transformer (Dehghani et al., 2019; Yang et al., 2024) is (0, 1, 0)-universal.

Definition 1. A decoder-only (s, r, t)-universal transformer with h heads, d layers, model dimension
m (divisible by h), and feedforward width w is specified by:

1. An embedding projection matrix E :   Qm and positional encoding function  : N 
   Qm, which we assume separates 1 from other indices (Merrill and Sabharwal, 2024);

2. A list of s "initial" transformer layers (defined under "Transformer Sublayers" below);

3. A list of r "repeated" transformer layers;

4. A list of t "final" transformer layers;
5. An unembedding projection matrix U that maps vectors in Qm to logits in Q||.

We next define how the transformer maps a sequence w1 · · · wn  n to an output value y  ; to do
so, we will always specify that the transformer is unrolled to a specific depth function d(n), which
we will consider to be d(n) = log n.4 The computation is inductively defined by the residual

stream hi: a cumulative sum of all layer outputs at each token i. In the base case, the residual stream
hi is initialized to hi0 = E(wi) + (i). We then iteratively compute s + rd(n) + t more layers,
deciding which layer to use at each step as follows:

s-layer                                  if 1 <   s


L = r-layer (( - s - 1) mod r) + 1 if s <   s + rd(n)

t-layer  - s - rd(n)                     otherwise.

We then compute h1, . . . , hn = L(h1-1, . . . , hn-1). The transformer output is a token determined
by first computing the logits hn U, where  = s + rd(n) + t, and then selecting the token with
maximum score. We can identify a special token in  with "accept" and say that a transformer
recognizes language L if, for every w  , it outputs "accept" if and only if w  L.

An (s, r, t)-transformer unrolled to some fixed depth can be viewed as a "uniform" special case of a
fixed-depth transformer. Thus, constructions of dynamic-depth transformers (depth d(n) for inputs of
length n) imply that, given any bounded context length N , there also exists a fixed-depth transformer
with depth d(N ) for the task at hand. The fact that this can be done with a looped transformer
with dynamic depth is, in fact, a stronger condition that shows the construction is uniform, which is
formally important as non-uniform models of computation can have very strong and unrealistic power
(cf. Merrill et al., 2022). In this way, our results about looped transformers will provide insights about
standard, non-looped transformers with bounded context lengths.

Transformer Sublayers. To make Definition 1 well-defined, we will next describe the structure of
the self-attention and feedforward sublayers that make up the structure of each transformer layer. Our
definition of the transformer will have two minor differences from practice:

       1. Averaging-hard attention (a.k.a., saturated attention): attention weight is split uniformly
          across the tokens with maximum attention scores.

       2. Masked pre-norm: We assume standard pre-norm (Xiong et al., 2020) but add a learned
          mask vector m  Rm that can select specific dimensions of the residual stream per sublayer.

Under masked pre-norm, the sublayer input will be read as sequence of normalized residual stream
values zi = layer_norm(m  hi), where  is elementwise product and layer-norm can be standard
layer-norm (Ba et al., 2016) or RMS norm (Zhang and Sennrich, 2019). The sublayer then maps
z1, . . . , zn to a sequence 1, . . . , n, and updates the residual stream as hi = hi + i.
Definition 2 (Self-attention sublayer). The self-attention sublayer is parameterized by a mask
m  Qm, output projection matrix W : Qm  Qm, and, for 1  k  h, query, key, and value
matrices Qk, Kk, Vk, each of which is a projection from Qm to Qm/h.

    4Following computer science conventions, we let log n  log2 n.

                      3
Given input zi, the self-attention sublayer computes queries qi = Qkzi, keys ki = Kkzi, and values
vi = Vkzi. Next, these values are used to compute the attention head outputs:

ai,k  =  lim    c  exp(1/ · qi,kkj,k)  ·  vj,k ,                             c
              j=1           Zi,k
          0                                       where Zi,k = exp 1/ · qi,kkj,k

                                                                           j=1

and c = i for causal attention and c = n for unmasked attention. The   0 limit implements
averaging-hard attention: all probability mass is concentrated on the indices j for which the attention
score is maximized. This idealization is similar to assuming the temperature of the attention is large
relative to the sequence length n. Finally, the attention heads are aggregated to create an output to the
residual stream i = W · concat(ai,1, . . . , ai,h).

Definition 3 (Feedforward sublayer). The feedforward sublayer at layer  is parameterized by a mask
m  Qm and projections W : Qm  Qw and U : Qw  Qm.

A feedforward layer computes a local update to the residual stream via i = U · ReLU(Wzi).

Positional Encodings. We will assume no positional encodings (Kazemnejad et al., 2023), but that
there is a beginning of sequence (BoS) symbol at the start. As described by Merrill and Sabharwal
(2024), our constructions will generalize to any positional encoding as long as either BoS is provided
or the first token's positional encoding is linearly separable from all other positional encodings.

2.1 Memory Management in Universal Transformers

A technical challenge when working with universal transformers that add values to the residual
stream is that if one is not careful, outputs from the previous iteration of a layer may interfere with its
computation at a later iteration. This necessitates "memory management" of individual cells in which
the transformer stores values. In particular, any intermediate values stored by a layer must be "reset"
to 0 and any desired output values must be correctly updated after use in subsequent layers.

Section A discusses in detail how {-1, 0, 1} values can be stored directly in the residual stream,
while a general scalar z can be storedeither as (z) = z, 1, -z, -1 in its unnormalized form or as
the unit vector (z) = 1/ 2 · (z)/ z2 + 1 in its normalized form ("layer-norm hash"; cf. Merrill
and Sabharwal, 2024). Importantly, however z is stored, when it is read using masked pre-norm, we
obtain (z). In Section A, we show how numerical values represented using  or  can be easily
written (Lemma 4), read (Lemma 2), and deleted (Lemmas 5 and 6) from the residual stream. We
will leverage these operations heavily in our theoretical constructions.

2.2 Numerical Datatype and Precision

Our constructions will involve working with scalars used as pointers to token positions, which will be
stored in and retrieved from the residual stream (as discussed in Section 2.1). We thus need (log n)
bits of precision. We now formalize the underlying datatype we use for our constructions.

We assume scalars are encoded as strings in {0, 1}p, with p = c log n for some fixed c > 0. Note
that model parameters in our fully uniform setting cannot depend on n, but activations can. We
assume there is some datatype Dp that assigns a numerical semantics for each string in {0, 1}p. For
x  R, let [x]Dp be x rounded into Dp, i.e., the bitstring whose numerical value in Dp is closest to x
(breaking ties in favor of the higher value).

Our constructions will be agnostic to the underlying details of Dp. Instead, we will minimally assume
that, for some fixed c, all arithmetic operations in the transformer computation graph (addition,
multiplication, division, exp, and layer-norm) are p-precise for p  c log n in the following sense:
Definition 4 (p-Precise Operations). Let f : Rk  R be an operation with p-precision realization
f~ : Dkp  Dp. We say f~ is p-precise if, for any x1, . . . , xk  R exactly representable in Dp,

                                 [f (x1, . . . , xk)]Dp = f~([x1]Dp , . . . , [xk]Dp ).

To apply this definition, we view the summation in attention heads as an n-ary operation. We also
view layer-norm as a single operation from Rm  Rm.

                                          4
Definition 4 is naturally satisfied by the log-precision transformer model formalized by Merrill et al.
(2024, Section 2.2 and Appendix A) and used in earlier work (Merrill and Sabharwal, 2023a,b), as
long as sufficient precision is used internally to compute attention and layer-norm precisely. It is
an open question how much precision is required by the internal primitive operations of summation
and layer-norm to guarantee their output is (c log n)-precise. We intentionally abstract away these
low-level details here, especially because, in practice, additional precision is typically allocated in
any case for attention and layer-norm computation (Micikevicius et al., 2018; Ai2, 2024).

Finally, we briefly note how Definition 4 relates to other datatype models. Chiang et al. (2023)
propose a polynomial-precision rational datatype, which satisfies Definition 4 because the first c log n
bits (and potentially more) are correct. In contrast, finite-precision transformers do not satisfy
Definition 4 because only O(1) bits are correct. In particular, while the mixed-precision model of
Yang et al. (2025) can precisely represent attention, it cannot store (c log n)-bit values in the residual
stream or as the output of layer-norm. It therefore does not satisfy Definition 4 or suffice for our
constructions.

3 Fixed Depth Transformers Can Divide Small Integers

A useful primitive for coordinating information routing in a log-depth transformer will be dividing
integers and computing remainders. We therefore start by proving that transformers can perform
integer division for small numbers, which will be a useful tool for our main results. Specifically, we
show that given a non-negative integer ai no larger than the current position i, one can compute and
store the (normalized) quotient and remainder when ai is divided by an integer m. This effectively
means transformers can perform arithmetic modulo m for small integers.

Lemma 1 (Division). Let ai, bi, ci, m  Z0 be such that ai = bim + ci where ai  i and ci < m.
Suppose (i), (m), and (ai) (or (ai)) are present in the residual stream of a transformer at each
token i. Then, there exists a block of 7 transformer layers with causally masked attention and masked
pre-norm that, on any input sequence, adds (bi) and (ci) to the residual stream at each token i.

Proof. The overall idea is as follows. In the first layer, each position i outputs an indicator of whether
it's a multiple of m. It also adds (j) to the residual stream such that j is the quotient i/m if i is
a multiple of m. In the second layer, each position i attends to the nearest position j  i that is a
multiple of m and retrieves the (normalized) quotient stored there, which is j/m = i/m. It adds
this (normalized) quotient in its own residual stream. We then use Lemma 7 (§A.3) to construct a
third layer that adds (i - 1) and (i - 2) to the residual stream. A fourth layer checks in parallel
whether the quotient stored at i matches the quotients stored at i - 1 and i - 2, respectively. In the
fifth layer, position i counts the number of positions storing the same quotient as i, excluding the
first such position. Finally, in the sixth layer, position i attends to position ai to compute and add
to the residual stream (ai/m) (which is (bi)) and (ai - mai/m) (which is (ci)). We next
describe a detailed implementation of the construction, followed by an argument of its correctness.

Construction. The first layer uses the following attention head. The query at position i is qi =
(i, m) = (i/m) computed via Lemma 3 (§A.1) leveraging the assumption that (i) and (m) are
present in the residual stream. The key and value at position j are kj = vj = (j) Let h1i = (j)
denote the head's output. The feedforward sublayer computes ei = I(hi1 = (i/m)) using Lemma 8
(scalar equality check, §A.4) on the first coordinate of hi1 and (i/m). By Lemma 9 (§B), ei = 1 if
and only if i is a multiple of m and, if ei = 1, then hi1 = (i/m), i.e., it represents the quotient i/m.
We store hi1 = (i/m) and ei to the residual stream.5

The second layer uses a head that attends with query qi = 1, 1, key kj = ej, [(j)]0, and
value vj = h1j ; both ej and hj1 can be read from the residual stream using masked pre-norm. This
head attends to all positions j  i that are multiples of m (where ej = 1), with [(j)]0, the first
component of (j), serving as a tie-breaking term for breaking ties in favor of the nearest multiple of
m. Lemma 10 (§B) shows this head outputs hi2 = (i/m), which we store in the residual stream.

The third layer uses Lemma 7 (§A.3) to add (i - 1) and (i - 2) to the residual stream at position i.

    5As described in §8, a component will be added to the second layer to reset intermediate memory cells used
in the first layer to 0 (this will happen analogously in later layers, but we will omit mentioning it).

                                                           5
In parallel for k  {1, 2}, the fourth layer attends with query qi = (i - k), key kj = (j), and
value vj = (j/m) to retrieve the quotient stored at position i - k. It uses Lemma 8 (SA.4) on
the first coordinate to store in the residual stream a boolean bki = I((i/m) = ((i - k)/m)),
indicating whether the quotient stored at i matches the quotient stored at i - k.

In the fifth layer, position i attends with query qi = (i/m), 1, key kj = (j/m), b1j ,
and value vj = 1 - bj2. When the output h5i of this layer is read through layer norm, it produces
(h5i ) = (i mod m) as proved in Lemma 11 (§B).

The sixth layer attends with query qi = (ai), key kj = (j), and value vj = j/m, (j mod m)
(from layers two and five) to compute (ai/m), (ai mod m), which equals (bi), (ci).

The seventh and final layer cleans up any remaining intermediate values stored in the residual stream,
setting them back to 0 as per Lemma 8. This is possible because all values v are of the form (x) or a
boolean, which means adding -(v) to the residual stream will reset the corresponding cell to 0.

Our division construction is somewhat similar to the modular counting construction from Strobl et al.
(2024), though the tools and underlying assumptions are different. Specifically, their approach relies
on nonstandard position embeddings whereas ours uses masked pre-norm.

4 Log Depth Enables Recognizing Regular Languages

Constant-depth transformers cannot recognize regular languages, a natural task closely related to state
tracking (Liu et al., 2023; Merrill et al., 2024). Liu et al. (2023, Theorem 1)6 show that a variant of
log-depth transformers can recognize regular languages using an associative prefix-sum construction
(cf. Hillis and Steele Jr, 1986; Blelloch, 1990). However, it is, prima facie, unclear whether the fully
uniform model of transformers we study--where the parameters cannot change at all with n--can
implement their construction for two key reasons:

       1. To handle information routing, Liu et al. (2023, Page 44) require parameters that are not
           fully uniform, meaning they can depend on the input length and depth. This leaves it unclear
           whether a single transformer (with a fixed set of parameters) could solve the task across
           all input lengths. In other words, their work leaves it unclear whether a single transformer
           could implement the approach in a way that generalizes to inputs of any length.

       2. Liu et al. (2023) also make several simplifications to the transformer architecture: they
           add non-standard positional embeddings and remove residual connections and layer-norm.
           While one could adapt their construction to handle residual connections, it is not clear how
           to do this while also making their construction uniform, which requires proper memory
           management of cells in the residual stream (Section 2.1).

Our result, using Lemma 1, addresses both of these weaknesses. It shows, for the first time, that a
single transformer with fixed parameters (w.r.t. input length n) can recognize strings of any length;
moreover this transformer does not require specific positional encodings, allows for layer-norm (in
fact leverages it), and allows for residual connections while remaining fully uniform.

Theorem 1 (Regular Language Recognition). Let L be a regular language over  recognized by a
(non-)deterministic finite automaton with states Q. Let $  . Then there exists a causally masked
(0, 8, 9)-universal transformer with

        · model dimension mNFA = O(|Q|2), or mDFA = O(|Q| log|Q|) if deterministic;
        · feedforward width wNFA = O 2|Q|4 , or wDFA = O 2|Q|2 log2|Q| if deterministic;

that, on any string w$, recognizes whether w  L when unrolled to log2|w| depth.

Proof in Section C. Theorem 1 reveals that running a transformer to (log n) depth on inputs of
length n unlocks new power compared to a fixed-depth transformer, assuming TC0 = NC1. If we do
not care that the construction is uniform across layers, we can simplify 8-layer block that determines
activeness to 1 layer: we simply hardcode the layer index  and use a single transformer layer to
compute i mod . Thus, the non-uniform construction results in a shallower transformer family:

    6Saunshi et al. (2025, Theorem 5.1) also give a log-depth transformer construction for the regular language
recognition problem. It is, however, not fully uniform as positions are encoded with vectors of length O(log n).

                                                           6
Corollary 1.1 (Regular Language Recognition, Non-Uniform). Let L be a regular language over
 and $  . There exists a family of causally masked transformers {Tn}n=1 where Tn has
4log2 n + 5 layers such that, on any string w$ of length n, Tn recognizes whether w  L.

These results can be extended beyond regular languages: if a b-layer transformer can perform some
binary associative operation  : X × X  X, then one can construct an (b log n) layer transformer
that computes the iterated version on n values, x1  x2  . . .  xn  X. One example is iterated
matrix multiplication. For matrices from a fixed set (e.g., k × k boolean matrices), Theorem 1
already shows that this task can be performed. However, if the matrices are not from a fixed set (e.g.,
matrices over Z or Q or whose shape depends on n), then it is unclear whether log-depth transformers
can solve the binary multiplication problem, and thus whether they can solve the iterated version.

Fixed Depth and Bounded Length Inputs. Interestingly, while Theorem 1 and Corollary 1.1 are
about log-depth transformers, they can be turned around to infer bounds on the input length up to
which fixed depth transformers (i.e., depth fixed w.r.t. input length) can recognize regular languages.
Specifically, given any regular language L and a fixed d, Corollary 1.1 implies that there exists a
depth d transformer that can recognize strings w  L as long as 4log2|w| + 5  d,7 which is
satisfied if 4 (1 + log2|w|) + 5  d, i.e., |w|  2(d-9)/4:
Corollary 1.2 (Depth Scaling for Regular Language). Let L be a regular language over  and $  .
For any d  N, there exists a causally masked d-layer transformer that, on any string w$ of length at
most 2(d-9)/4 + 1, recognizes whether w  L.

An analogous result holds for universal (i.e., shared parameter) transformers from Theorem 1.

5 Log Depth Enables Graph Connectivity

In the graph connectivity problem (also referred to as STCON or the reachability problem), the
input is a graph G, along with a source vertex s and a target vertex t. The task is to determine if G
has a path from s to t. This is a core problem at the heart of many computational questions in areas
as diverse as network security, routing and navigation, chip design, and--perhaps most commonly
for language models--multi-step reasoning. This problem is known to be complete for the class of
logspace Turing machines (Reingold, 2008; Immerman, 1998), which means that, under common
complexity conjectures, it cannot be solved accurately by fixed-depth transformers, which can only
solve problems in the smaller class TC0. However, graph connectivity can be expressed by log-depth
threshold circuits (TC1, Barrington and Maciel, 2000), which opens up a natural question: Can
log-depth transformers, which are in TC1, solve graph connectivity?

Sanford et al. (2024) provide results showing that a non-uniform log-depth transformer with arbitrarily
powerful feedforward nets can solve variants of graph connectivity. We prove that even a fully uniform
log-depth transformer can solve graph connectivity (proof sketch below, full proof in Section D):

Theorem 2 (Graph Connectivity). There exists a (17, 2, 1)-universal transformer T with both causal
and unmasked heads, fixed model dimension m, and fixed feedforward width w that, when unrolled
log2 n times, solves connectivity on (directed or undirected) graphs over n vertices: given the
n × n adjacency matrix of a graph G, n3 padding tokens, and s, t  {1, . . . n} in unary, T checks
whether G has a path from vertex s to vertex t.

Proof Sketch. We will prove this for the more general case of a directed graph G over n vertices. Let
A  {0, 1}n×n be G's adjacency matrix. The idea is to use the first n2 tokens of the transformer to

construct binary predicates B(i, j) for   {0, 1, . . . , log n} capturing whether G has a path of
length at most 2 from i to j. To this end, the transformer will use the n3 padding tokens to also

construct intermediate ternary predicates C(i, k, j) for   {1, . . . , log n} capturing whether G
has paths of length at most 2-1 from i to k and from k to j. These two series of predicates are

computed from each other iteratively, as in standard algorithms for graph connectivity:

B0(i, j)  A(i, j)  i = j                (1)

C+1(i, k, j)  B(i, k)  B(k, j)          (2)

B+1(i, j)  k s.t. C+1(i, k, j)          (3)

7The inequality holds since Corollary 1.1 generalizes to show Tn recognizes all strings of length m  n.

7
The crucial part is to construct a transformer that correctly operationalizes the computation of
predicates B and C. The input to the transformer is the adjacency matrix A represented using
n2 tokens from {0, 1}, followed by n3 padding tokens , and finally the source and target nodes
s, t  {1, . . . , n} represented in unary notation using special tokens a and b:

A1,1 . . . A1,n A2,1 . . . A2,n . . . . . . An,1 . . . An,n  . . . . . . . . .  a . . . . . . a b . . . . . . b

   n3  s  t

Let N = n2 + n3 + s + t, the length of the input to the transformer. The first n2 token positions will
be used to compute predicates B, while the next n3 token positions will be used for predicates C.

Initial Layers. The transformer starts off by using layer 1 to store 1/N, n, n2, s, and t in the residual

stream at every position. It then uses the next 15 layers to compute and store in the residual stream
the semantic "coordinates" of each of the first n2 + n3 token position, namely, (i, j) for each of the
first n2 positions p = in + j and (i, k, j) for each of the next n3 positions p = n2 + (in2 + kn + j).
Finally, layer 17 of the transformer computes the predicate B0(i, j) at the first n2 token positions.

Repeated Layers. The repeated layers alternate between computing the C and the B predicates for
  {1, . . . , log n}. The idea is to compute C(i, k, j) in the n3 padding tokens by attending to
positions (i, k) and (k, j) and retrieving B-1(i, k) and B-1(k, j). Similarly, B(i, j) is computed
in the n2 input positions via uniform attention over padding positions (i, k, j) that store C(i, k, j).

Final Layers. Finally, in layer 2log n + 18, the final token uses a head that attends with query

(s), (t) corresponding to the source and target nodes s and t mentioned in the input, attending
solely to the position with coordinates (s, t), and retrieving the final value Blog n(s, t).

Thus, while NC1 circuits (which have log depth) cannot solve graph connectivity unless NC1 = NL,
log-depth transformers can.

Fixed Depth and Bounded Length Inputs. As for regular languages, this result also provides a
concrete input length bound up to which a fixed-depth transformer can solve this problem, namely
when 18 + 2log2 n  d, which is satisfied if 18 + 2 (1 + log2 n)  d, i.e., n  2(d-20)/2:

Corollary 2.1 (Depth Scaling for Graph Connectivity). For any d  N, there exists a d-layer
transformer with both causal and unmasked heads that, on any graph with at most 2(d-20)/2 vertices,
solves the connectivity problem.

6 Comparing Scaling Depth to Scaling Width or Chain of Thought

Our results show that looping layers enables transformers to solve problems likely (conditionally
under the conjecture that TC0 = NC1) outside TC0. We now consider how looping compares in
expressive power to other ways to add computation to transformers. Rather than increasing depth by
repeating layers, one can increase a transformer's width via a larger model dimension (Definition 1)
or padding tokens (Pfau et al., 2024). Whereas slightly increasing depth likely expands expressive
power beyond TC0, we show that achieving expressivity beyond TC0 via width likely requires
superpolynomial width, which is intractable. In contrast to repeating layers, another way to extend
inference-time computation is using chain-of-thought (CoT) steps. We thus compare the expressive
power achieved repeated layers with CoT steps.

Wide Transformers with Fixed Depth Remain in TC0. Our Corollaries 2.1 and 1.2 show that
minimally growing a transformer's depth allows it to express key problems that are likely outside TC0.
In contrast, Theorem 3 (which extends Merrill and Sabharwal (2023a); for completeness, Section E
gives a sketch) shows that, if depth remains fixed, width must increase drastically with sequence
length to enable expressive power outside TC0.

Theorem 3 (Width Scaling). Let T be a fixed-depth transformer whose width (model dimension or
padding tokens; Pfau et al., 2024) grows at most polynomial in n and whose weights on input length
n (to accommodate growing width) are computable in L. Then T can be simulated in L-uniform TC0.

Thus, to solve reasoning problems outside TC0 over a context length n, growing depth is much more
efficient than growing width. Of course, there may be other types of problems (e.g., those that are

8
512                                                                                32

256

                                                                                      24
128
context length (log scale)
                                                                   context length6416

32

     6  9  12 dep15th 18 21 24                                                     8      128  2w56idth (log scal5e1)2  1024

Figure 2: Strong linear fits imply theory/experiment match for modeling the impact of depth (left,
d = 4.8 log2 n - 15.8 with r2 = 0.93) and width (right, n = 7.2 log2 w - 41.7 with r2 = 0.98) on
effective context length for the A5 state tracking task, a canonical hard regular language recognition

problem. As predicted by Theorems 1 and 3, to recognize strings of length n, depth only needs to

increase minimally  log n while width must increase drastically as exp((n)).

knowledge intensive or very parallelizable) where growing width might be more important than
growing depth. Petty et al. (2024) provide an interesting empirical investigation of this choice on
language modeling, semantic parsing, and other tasks.

Transformers with Logarithmic Chain-of-Thought Steps Remain in TC0. Merrill and Sabhar-
wal (2024, Theorem 4) analyze the power of transformers with O(log n) CoT steps, showing it is at
most L. However, we have shown that transformers with (log n) depth can solve directed graph
connectivity, which is NL-complete: this suggests growing depth has some power beyond growing
CoT unless L = NL. In fact, the O(log n) CoT steps result can be strengthened (Li et al., 2024,
Figure 10; for completeness, Section E gives a sketch) to an upper bound of TC0:

Theorem 4 (CoT Scaling). Transformers with O(log n) chain-of-thought steps can only recognize
languages in L-uniform TC0.

Thus, while giving a model O(log n) CoT steps does not increase its expressive power beyond TC0,
our Theorems 1 and 2 allow (log n) to solve key problems that are (likely) outside TC0. This
demonstrates an advantage of dynamic depth over CoT as a form of inference-time compute for
reasoning problems including regular language recognition and graph connectivity. It would be
interesting to explore this comparison more generally for other problems.

7 Experiments: Learning to Recognize Regular Languages

Our theory characterizes the depth and width required to express regular language recognition and
graph connectivity. Specifically, Theorem 1 predicts that recognizing regular languages over strings
of length n is empirically possible with depth proportional to log n. On the other hand, Theorem 3
predicts that the width would need to scale superpolynomially. Here, we aim to empirically measure
how much depth and width transformers require in practice when trained to recognize regular
languages. We will find that expressibility and learnability are highly aligned here: transformers with
log depth can learn to recognize regular languages, whereas width must increase superpolynomially
with n. Moreover, we can empirically quantify the constant factors in these relationships.

We report on an extensive set of experiments to address these questions, training models of different
depths and widths on the A5 state tracking task (Merrill et al., 2024), which is a canonical testbed for
hard regular language recognition (Theorem 1). The input to the task is a sequence of elements in
A5 (the group of even permutations over 5 elements), and the label at each token is the cumulative
product of previous permutations up to and including that token (which is itself an element of A5).

We train several (non-universal) transformers with the same architecture used by Merrill et al. (2024)
on 100 million A5 sequences of varying lengths up to 1024. To understand the impact of depth and
width in a controlled way, we train two series of transformers: the first with width fixed to 512 and
depth varying in {6, 9, 12, 15, 18, 21, 24}, and the second with depth fixed to 6 and width varying

                                                           9
in {128, 256, 512, 1024}. See Section F for further details about our training procedure. After each
model is trained, we measure accuracy at each token index from 1 to 1024 and define n as the
maximum token index at which the model achieved at least 95% validation accuracy. As we trained
several seeds with the same depth and width, we aggregate these results across all models with
the same depth and width by taking the best-performing (max n) model. We then plot n, which
represents the effective context length up to which a model can solve the A5 problem, as a function
of either depth or width, holding the other variable fixed. We then evaluate if the predicted theoretical
relationships between depth, width, and context length hold via an r2 statistic.

The results are shown in Figure 2. When varying depth (left plot), there is a very strong positive
correlation (r2 = 0.93) between model depth (x-axis) and log n (y-axis, log scale), the effective
(log) context length till which it can solve problems with high accuracy. When varying width (right
plot) there is an even stronger positive correlation (r2 = 0.98) between log width (x-axis, log scale)
and n (y-axis). These results provide strong empirical support for our theoretical predictions that,
to recognize regular languages over strings of length n, increasing depth logarithmically in n will
suffice (Theorem 1), but width must increase exponentially in n (Theorem 3). Figure 2 also gives us
a strongly predictive functional form to quantify the impact of scaling depth or width on the effective
context length for regular language recognition. The empirical slope for the depth relationship is
is 4.8 layers per log tokens. This is less than the slope of 8 derived for universal transformers in
Theorem 1, but slightly greater than the theoretical coefficient of 4 for transformers whose depth
grows non-uniformly with context length. Thus, our transformers have learned a construction whose
depth coefficient is comparable to what we showed was possible in theory, though perhaps slightly
more wasteful than it needs to be. Overall, these empirical results show that, in practice, the impact of
depth and width on effective context length for regular language recognition aligns with our theoretical
predictions, and we are able to empirically fit the quantitative coefficients in the relationships.

8 Conclusion

We have shown that recognizing regular languages and graph connectivity, two key problems inex-
pressible by fixed-depth transformers, become expressible if the depth of the transformer can grow
very slightly (logarithmically) with the context length by repeating layers. This implies transformers
with fixed depth d can solve these problems up to bounded context lengths of 2O(d). Further, we
showed that scaling depth to solve these problems is more efficient than scaling width (which re-
quires superpolynomial increase) or scaling chain-of-thought steps (which requires superlogarithmic
increase). As dynamic test-time compute methods have become popular for building more powerful
reasoning models such as OpenAI o1 (OpenAI, 2024) and DeepSeek-R1 (DeepSeek AI, 2025), it
would be interesting to explore whether universal transformers can realize this theoretical efficiency
to provide more efficient long-context reasoning than chain-of-thought steps in practice.

While growing depth enables transformers to solve some key problems outside TC0, there are limita-
tions on the types of problems log depth should enable solving. Unless NC = P, log-depth (or even
polylog-depth) transformers cannot express P-complete problems including solving linear equalities,
in-context context-free language recognition, circuit evaluation, and determining the satisfiability
of Horn clauses (Greenlaw et al., 1991). In future work, it would interesting to study the depth
required for transformers to solve other interesting problems in NC including context-free recognition
(generalizing regular languages; Theorem 1), which is in AC1 (Ruzzo, 1981; Venkateswaran, 1991)
and boolean formula evaluation, which is NC1-complete (Buss, 1987). This would help us better
understand the degree to which repeating layers can be used as a form of interence-time compute.

Limitations

We have given constructions whereby looped transformers can express NC1-hard problems, though
we have not considered looped transformers' inductive biases and learning dynamics, which are
also important in practice beyond expressivity. Saunshi et al. (2025) empirically study the inductive
biases of looped transformers, suggesting looped transformers may generalize in ways favorable for
reasoning tasks. Our experiments in Section 7 were conducted with non-looped transformers. It
would be interesting in future work to evaluate how the depth requirements change if we enforce that
the transformer must re-use the same weights across layers.

                                                          10
References

Ai2. OLMo: Accelerating the science of language models. In ACL, 2024.

J. L. Ba, J. R. Kiros, and G. E. Hinton. Layer normalization, 2016. URL https://arxiv.org/
   abs/1607.06450.

D. A. M. Barrington and D. Thérien. Finite monoids and the fine structure of NC1. J. ACM, 35(4):
   941­952, oct 1988. ISSN 0004-5411. doi: 10.1145/48014.63138.

D. M. Barrington and A. Maciel. Lecture 5: The landscape of complexity classes, 2000. Lecture
   notes.

G. E. Blelloch. Prefix sums and their applications. Technical Report CMU-CS-90-190, School of
   Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University, Nov. 1990.

S. R. Buss. The Boolean formula value problem is in ALOGTIME. In STOC, page 123­131, 1987.
   doi: 10.1145/28395.28409.

D. Chiang, P. Cholak, and A. Pillay. Tighter bounds on the expressivity of transformer encoders. In
  ICML, 2023.

DeepSeek AI. DeepSeek-R1: Incentivizing reasoning capability in LLMs via reinforcement learning.
   arXiv, abs/2501.12948, 2025.

M. Dehghani, S. Gouws, O. Vinyals, J. Uszkoreit, and L. Kaiser. Universal transformers. In ICLR,
   2019.

J. Geiping, S. McLeish, N. Jain, J. Kirchenbauer, S. Singh, B. R. Bartoldson, B. Kailkhura, A. Bhatele,
   and T. Goldstein. Scaling up test-time compute with latent reasoning: A recurrent depth approach.
  ArXiv, abs/2502.05171, 2025.

R. Greenlaw, H. J. Hoover, and W. L. Ruzzo. A compendium of problems complete for P. Technical
   Report TR91-11, University of Alberta, 1991. URL https://doi.org/10.7939/R39Z90F7X.

W. D. Hillis and G. L. Steele Jr. Data parallel algorithms. Communications of the ACM, 29(12):
  1170­1183, 1986.

N. Immerman. Descriptive complexity. Springer Science & Business Media, 1998.

A. Kazemnejad, I. Padhi, K. Natesan, P. Das, and S. Reddy. The impact of positional encoding on
   length generalization in transformers. In NeurIPS, 2023.

Z. Li, H. Liu, D. Zhou, and T. Ma. Chain of thought empowers transformers to solve inherently serial
   problems. In ICLR, 2024.

B. Liu, J. T. Ash, S. Goel, A. Krishnamurthy, and C. Zhang. Transformers learn shortcuts to automata.
   In ICLR, 2023.

W. Merrill and A. Sabharwal. The parallelism tradeoff: Limitations of log-precision transformers.
  TACL, 11, 2023a.

W. Merrill and A. Sabharwal. A logic for expressing log-precision transformers. In NeurIPS, 2023b.

W. Merrill and A. Sabharwal. The expressive power of transformers with chain of thought. In ICLR,
   2024.

W. Merrill, A. Sabharwal, and N. A. Smith. Saturated transformers are constant-depth threshold
   circuits. TACL, 10:843­856, 2022.

W. Merrill, J. Petty, and A. Sabharwal. The illusion of state in state-space models. In ICML, 2024.

Meta AI. The Llama 3 herd of models. arXiv, abs/2407.21783, 2024.

P. Micikevicius, S. Narang, J. Alben, G. Diamos, E. Elsen, D. Garcia, B. Ginsburg, M. Houston,
   O. Kuchaiev, G. Venkatesh, and H. Wu. Mixed precision training. In ICLR, 2018. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=r1gs9JgRZ.

                                                          11
J. Myhill. Finite automata and the representation of events. WADD Technical Report, 57:112­137,
  1957.

OpenAI. Openai o1 system card. arXiv, abs/2412.16720, 2024.
J. Petty, S. Steenkiste, I. Dasgupta, F. Sha, D. Garrette, and T. Linzen. The impact of depth on

   compositional generalization in transformer language models. In NAACL, 2024.
J. Pfau, W. Merrill, and S. R. Bowman. Let's think dot by dot: Hidden computation in transformer

   language models. In COLM, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=NikbrdtYvG.
O. Reingold. Undirected connectivity in log-space. J. ACM, 55(4), Sept. 2008. ISSN 0004-5411. doi:

  10.1145/1391289.1391291.
W. L. Ruzzo. On uniform circuit complexity. Journal of Computer and System Sciences, 22(3):

   365­383, 1981. ISSN 0022-0000. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/0022-0000(81)90038-6. URL
   https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/0022000081900386.
C. Sanford, B. Fatemi, E. Hall, A. Tsitsulin, M. Kazemi, J. Halcrow, B. Perozzi, and V. Mirrokni.
   Understanding transformer reasoning capabilities via graph algorithms. In NeurIPS, 2024.
N. Saunshi, N. Dikkala, Z. Li, S. Kumar, and S. J. Reddi. Reasoning with latent thoughts: On the
   power of looped transformers. In ICLR, 2025.
L. Strobl, D. Angluin, D. Chiang, J. Rawski, and A. Sabharwal. Transformers as transducers. arXiv,
   abs/2404.02040, 2024.
D. Thérien. Classification of finite monoids: the language approach. Theoretical Computer Science,
  14(2):195­208, 1981. ISSN 0304-3975. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/0304-3975(81)90057-8. URL
   https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/0304397581900578.
H. Venkateswaran. Properties that characterize LOGCFL. Journal of Computer and System Sciences,
  43(2):380­404, 1991. ISSN 0022-0000. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/0022-0000(91)90020-6. URL
   https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/0022000091900206.
J. Wei, X. Wang, D. Schuurmans, M. Bosma, brian ichter, F. Xia, E. H. Chi, Q. V. Le, and D. Zhou.
   Chain of thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. In NeurIPS, 2022.
R. Xiong, Y. Yang, D. He, K. Zheng, S. Zheng, H. Zhang, Y. Lan, L. Wang, and T.-Y. Liu. On layer
   normalization in the transformer architecture, 2020. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
   id=B1x8anVFPr.
A. Yang, M. Cadilhac, and D. Chiang. Knee-deep in C-RASP: A transformer depth hierarchy, 2025.
   URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.16055.
L. Yang, K. Lee, R. D. Nowak, and D. Papailiopoulos. Looped transformers are better at learning
   learning algorithms. In ICLR, 2024.
B. Zhang and R. Sennrich. Root mean square layer normalization. In NeurIPS, 2019.

                                                          12
A Building Blocks

A.1 Residual Stream Storage Interface

Our masked pre-norm transformer architecture always normalizes values when reading them from
the residual stream. This means that it's not always the case that what's added to the residual stream
by one layer is accessible as-is in future layers, which can be problematic if there is a need to "erase"
that value. We discuss how values are stored and, if needed, erased from the stream.
For any general scalar z, storing z in the residual stream results in sgn(z) being retrieved when
masked pre-norm is applied to this cell. This will be useful when we want to collapse multiple values
or perform equality or threshold checks. As a special case, when z  {-1, 0, 1}, the retrieved value
after masked pre-norm is precisely z. Thus scalars in {-1, 0, 1} can be stored and retrieved without
any information loss.
In order to retrieve a value z with masked pre-norm (rather than just its sign), we can instead represent
z as a 4-dimensional vector (z) = z, 1, -z, -1. Then, pre-norm masked to only this vector will
return (z) = 1/ 2 · (z)/ z2 + 1. Scalars z stored as (z) or (z) in the residual stream can be
trivially retrieved as (z) by masked pre-norm:
Lemma 2. There exists a masked pre-norm  such that, if (z) or (z) is stored in h, (h) = (z).

Furthermore, a single masked pre-norm can even be used to retrieve multiple scalars stored in the
residual stream. Since (z) is a unit-norm vector, this is a consequence of the following lemma:
Lemma 3. There exists a masked pre-norm  such that, if h stores unit-norm vectors 1, . . . , k,
then (h) = 1, . . . k.

Proof. We apply the mask to focus on the positions where 1, . . . , k are stored. Then, the masked
pre-norm outputs

                                                   1
                                                  1, . . . , k.

                                                   2k
We can hardcode the scalar multiplier of layer-norm to remove the scalar factor, or, equivalently,
bake it into the next linear transformation. Either way, we are able to retrieve the concatenation of
1, . . . , k as input to the layer.

The following establishes that we can compute numerical values z with attention heads and make
them accessible as (z) in later layers:
Lemma 4. Let z be a scalar computable by an attention head from residual stream h. There exist
two layers producing residual streams h, h such that

       1. (z) can be read via masked pre-norm from h or h.
       2. (z) is stored in h at (formerly blank) indices I.

Proof. The first layer computes z and stores (z) at blank indices I in the residual stream, producing
h. Thus, the second layer can read (z) with masked pre-norm via Lemma 2 and can also recompute
z from h, which is a subspace of h. At this point, it outputs -(z) + (z) at indices I, which leads
to h storing (z) at I.

A.2 Clearing Stored Values

In the repeated layers of a universal transformer, we will need to overwrite the values stored at
particular indices in the residual stream. That is, if [h]I = x, it will be useful to produce h such that
[h]I = y instead. The following lemmas will help implement constructions of this form.
Lemma 5. If a unit-norm vector  is stored in h at I, there exists a feedforward sub-layer that
removes , i.e., produces h such that [h]i = 0.

Proof. The layer reads  via masked pre-norm and writes - to h at I, setting [h]I = - = 0.

                                                          13
Combining Lemma 5 with a parallel layer that stores some new value at I, we see that we can
effectively overwrite values at I rather than just deleting them.

It is also possible to remove information that is not a unit-norm vector, although the construction is
less direct.

Lemma 6. Let  be the output of a transformer layer on h, targeted to indices I at which h is blank.
Then there exists another transformer layer that resets the residual stream h = h +  to h.

Proof. The second layer is a copy of the initial layer that considers the subvector h of h as its input
and where all signs are flipped. Thus, it outputs -, which guarantees that the final residual stream is
h = h +  -  = h.

A.3 Computing Position Offsets

It will be useful to show how a transformer can compute the position index of the previous token.

Lemma 7. For a fixed value k, assume that at each position i, a transformer stores 1[i = 0] and
1[i < k] in the residual stream. Then, there exists a layer that adds (i - k) to the residual stream at

token indices i  k.

Proof. We construct two attention heads. The first head is uniform with value j as 1[j = 0]. Thus, the
head computes h1 = 1/i. The second head is uniform with value j as 1[j  k], and thus computes

h2 = (i - k)/i. We then use a feedforward layer to compute:

(h1, h2) = (                    i-k 1
                                    , ) = (i - k).
                                i    i

The resulting value is then written to the residual stream.

The precondition that we can identify the initial token (cf. Merrill and Sabharwal, 2024) is easy to
meet with any natural representation of position, including 1/i or (i), as we can simply compare
the position representation against some constant.

We assume that the positional encodings used by the model allow detecting the initial token (Merrill
and Sabharwal, 2024). One way to enable this would simply be to add a beginning-of-sequence token,
although most position embeddings should also enable it directly.

A.4 Equality Checks

We show how to perform an equality check between two scalars and store the output as a boolean.
Lemma 8. Given two scalars x, y computable by attention heads or stored in the residual stream, we

can use a single transformer layer to write 1[x = y] in the residual stream. Furthermore, a second

layer can be used to clear all intermediate values.

Proof. After computing x, y in a self-attention layer, we write x - y to a temporary cell in the
residual stream. The feedforward sublayer reads 1 = sgn(x - y), computes z = 1 - ReLU(1) -
ReLU(-1), and writes z to the residual stream.

The next transformer layer then recomputes y - x and adds it to the intermediate memory cell, which
sets it back to 0. Thus, the output is correct and intermediate memory is cleared.

B Correctness of Division Construction Attention Heads

The proof of Lemma 1 presents the full construction to implement division in a transformer. For
space, we omitted a full proofs of correctness for attention heads in the construction, which we now
present. We expect some of these techniques could be reused, though we have not stated them as
generally as the gadgets in Section A.
Lemma 9 (First Layer of Lemma 1). Let h1i be an attention head computed with query qi = (i/m)
and keys/values kj = vj = (j). Let ei = I(hi1 = (i/m)). Then ei = 1 if and only if i is a multiple
of m. Furthermore, if ei = 1, then h1i = (i/m).

                                14
Proof. Suppose first that i is a multiple of m. In this case, there exists a position j  i such that
i = mj, which means the query qi = (i/m) = (j) exactly matches the key kj . The head will
thus return vj = (j) = (i/m), representing precisely the quotient i/m. Further, the equality
check will pass, making ei = 1. The layer thus behaves as intended when i is a multiple of m.
On the other hand, when i is not a multiple of m, no such j exists. The head will instead attend to
some j for which i = mj and therefore (i/m) = (j), making the subsequent equality check fail
and setting ei = 0, as intended.

Lemma 10 (Second Layer of Lemma 1). Let h2i be an attention head computed with qi = 1, 1, key
kj = ej, [(j)]0, and value vj = hj1. Then h2i = (i/m) .

Proof. By construction, qi · kj = ej - [(j)]0 where [(j)]0 = j/ 2j2 + 2 is the first coordinate
of (j). Note that [(j)]0  [0, 1) for positions j  i and that it is monotonically increasing in j.
It follows that the dot product is maximized at the largest j  i such that ej = 1, i.e., at the largest
j  i that is a multiple of m. This j has the property that i/m = j/m. Thus, the head at this layer
attends solely to this j. Recall that the value vj at this position is h1j = (j/m) = (i/m).

Lemma 11 (Fifth Layer of Lemma 1). Let h5i be an attention head computed with query qi =
(i/m), 1, key kj = (j/m), b1j , and value vj = 1 - b2j . Then h5i = (i mod m).

Proof. The query-key product achieves its upper bound of 2 exactly when two conditions hold:
i/m = j/m and b1j = 1. Thus, the head attends from i to all j  i that store the same quotient as
i and also have bj1 = 1. To make this clearer, let's write i as i = bm + c for some c < m. The query-
key dot product is then maximized precisely at the c positions j in {bm + 1, bm + 2, . . . , bm + c},
for all of which j/m = i/m = b; note that bm is not included in this list as bj1 = 0 when
j = bm. Of these positions, only bm + 1 has the property that the quotient there is not the same as
the quotient two position earlier, as captured by the value vj = 1 - bj2. Thus, the value vj is 1 among
these positions only at j = bm + 1, and 0 elsewhere.

Assuming m does not divide i, c > 0 and the head attends uniformly at c positions, returning 1/c
as the head output. By construction, c = i - bm = i mod m. The layer adds the vector (1, 1/c)
defined as 1, 1/c, -1, -1/c to the residual stream at position i. This, when read in the next layer
using masked pre-norm, will yield (1, 1/c) = (c) = (i mod m).

On the other hand, if m does divide i (which can be checked with a separate, parallel head), we write
(0) to the residual stream, which, when read by the next layer, will yield (0) = (i mod m).

C Regular Language Recognition Proof

Theorem 1 (Regular Language Recognition). Let L be a regular language over  recognized by a
(non-)deterministic finite automaton with states Q. Let $  . Then there exists a causally masked
(0, 8, 9)-universal transformer with

        · model dimension mNFA = O(|Q|2), or mDFA = O(|Q| log|Q|) if deterministic;
        · feedforward width wNFA = O 2|Q|4 , or wDFA = O 2|Q|2 log2|Q| if deterministic;

that, on any string w$, recognizes whether w  L when unrolled to log2|w| depth.

Proof. Regular language recognition can be framed as multiplying a sequence of elements in the
automaton's transition monoid (Myhill, 1957; Thérien, 1981). It thus suffices to show how n elements
in a finite monoid can be multiplied with (log n) depth. We show how a log-depth universal
transformer can implement the standard binary tree construction (Barrington and Thérien, 1988; Liu
et al., 2023; Merrill et al., 2024) where each level multiplies two items, meaning the overall depth
is (log|w|). We will represent a tree over the input tokens within the transformer. Each level of
the tree will take 8 transformer layers. We define a notion of active tokens: at level 0, all tokens are
active, and, at level , tokens at t · 2 - 1 for any t will remain active, and all other tokens will be
marked as inactive. As an invariant, active token i = t · 2 - 1 in level  will store a unit-norm vector
i that represents the cumulative product of tokens from i - 2 + 1 to i.

                                                           15
We now proceed by induction over , defining the behavior of non-$ tokens at layers that make
up level . The current group element i stored at active token i is, by inductive assumption, the
cumulative product from i - 2 + 1 to i. Let i denote that token i is active. By Lemma 7 we use
a layer to store i - 1 at token i. The next layer attends with query (i - 1), key (j), and value
j to retrieve i-1, the group element stored at the previous token. Finally, another layer attends
with query 1, key (j)1, i, and value j-1 to retrieve the group element j stored at the previous
active token, which represents the cumulative product from i - 2 · 2 + 1 to i - 2. Next, we will
use two layers to update i  i+1 and j  0, which is achieved as follows. First, we assert
there exists a single feedforward layer that uses a table lookup to compute j , i  d such that
d/d = j · i = i+1. Next, we invoke Lemma 6 to construct a layer that adds d to an empty cell
of the residual stream and then another layer that deletes it. This second layer can now read both
i, j and i+1 (from d) as input, and we modify it to add i+1 - i to i, changing its value to
i+1. Similarly, we modify it to add -j to j to set it to 0. A feedforward network then subtracts
i from the residual stream and adds i · j. This requires at most 4 layers.

To determine activeness in layer  + 1, each token i attends to its left to compute ci/i, where ci is the
prefix count of active tokens, inclusive of the current token. We then compute (ci/i, 1/i) = (ci)
and store ci it temporarily in the residual stream. At this point, we use Lemma 1 to construct 7 layers
that compute ci mod 2 with no storage overhead. The current token is marked as active in layer  + 1
iff ci = 0 mod 2, which is equivalent to checking whether i = t · 2 - 1 for some t. In addition to
updating the new activeness i+1, we also persist store the previous activeness i in a separate cell
of the residual stream and clear ci. This requires at most 8 layers.

Finally, we describe how to aggregate the cumulative product at the $ token, which happens in parallel
to the behavior at other tokens. Let $ be a monoid element stored at $ that is initialized to the identity
and will be updated at each layer. Using the previously stored value i - 1, we can use a layer to
compute and store i-1 and i-+11 at each i. A head then attends with query 1, key (j)1, 10 · i-1,
and value (1 - j+-11) · j-+11. This retrieves a value from the previous active token j at level
 that is j if j will become inactive at  + 1 and 0 otherwise. Iff j is retrieved, a feedforward
network subtracts $ from the residual stream and adds j · $. This guarantees that whenever a tree
is deactivated, its cumulative product is incorporated into $. Thus, after  = log2|w| + 1 levels,
$ will be the transition monoid element for w. We can use one additional layer to check whether
this monoid element maps the initial state to an accepting state using a finite lookup table. Overall,

this can be expressed with 8 layers repeated log2|w| times and 9 final layers (to implement the
additional step beyond log n).

Finally, we justify the model size m and feedforward width w. To represent a nondeterministic
monoid element Q  Q, which is defined by a matrix in {0, 1}|Q|×|Q|, we must store sNFA = |Q|2
bits. For a deterministic monoid element, we can reduce this to sDFA = |Q| log|Q| by storing the
index of the unique 1 in each row of the matrix. The model size is then m = O(s), which gives:

mNFA = O(|Q|2)                mDFA = O(|Q| log|Q|).

The feedforward network stores a lookup table enumerating all possible values of s2 bits, returning s
bits in each case. This can be represented as long as m = O(s) and w = O(2s2 ), which gives:

wNFA = O(2|Q|4 )              mDFA = O(2|Q|2 log2|Q|).

This finishes the proof.

D Graph Connectivity Proof

Theorem 2 (Graph Connectivity). There exists a (17, 2, 1)-universal transformer T with both causal
and unmasked heads, fixed model dimension m, and fixed feedforward width w that, when unrolled
log2 n times, solves connectivity on (directed or undirected) graphs over n vertices: given the
n × n adjacency matrix of a graph G, n3 padding tokens, and s, t  {1, . . . n} in unary, T checks
whether G has a path from vertex s to vertex t.

                          16
Proof. We will prove this for directed graphs, as an undirected edge between two vertices can be
equivalently represented as two directed edges between those vertices. Let G be a directed graph over
n vertices. Let A  {0, 1}n×n be G's adjacency matrix: for i, j  {1, . . . , n}, Ai,j is 1 if G has an
edge from i to j, and 0 otherwise.

The idea is to use the first n2 tokens of the transformer to construct binary predicates B(i, j) for
  {0, 1, . . . , log n} capturing whether G has a path of length at most 2 from i to j. To this
end, the transformer will use the n3 padding tokens to also construct intermediate ternary predicates
C(i, k, j) for   {1, . . . , log n} capturing whether G has paths of length at most 2-1 from i to
k and from k to j. These two series of predicates are computed from each other iteratively, as in

standard algorithms for graph connectivity:

B0(i, j)  A(i, j)  i = j                                                                                         (4)

C+1(i, k, j)  B(i, k)  B(k, j)                                                                                   (5)

B+1(i, j)  k s.t. C+1(i, k, j)                                                                                   (6)

We first argue that Blog n(i, j) = 1 if and only if G has a path from i to j. Clearly, there is such
a path if and only if there is a "simple path" of length at most n from i to j. To this end, we argue
by induction over  that B(i, j) = 1 if an only if G has a path of length at most 2 from i to j. For

the base case of  = 0, by construction, B0(i, j) = 1 if and only if either i = j (which we treat as a

path of length 0) or Ai,j = 1 (i.e., there is a direct edge from i to j). Thus, B(i, j) = 1 if and only
if there is a path of length at most 20 = 1 from i to j. Now suppose the claim holds for B(i, j). By

construction, C+1(i, k, j) = 1 if and only if B(i, k) = B(k, j) = 1, which by induction means
there are paths of length at most 2 from i to k and from k to j, which in turn implies that there is
a path of length at most 2 · 2 = 2+1 from i to j (through k). Furthermore, note conversely that if
there is a path of length at most 2+1 from i to j, then there must exist a "mid-point" k in this path
such that there are paths of length at most 2 from i to k and from k to j, i.e., C+1(i, k, j) = 1 for

some k. This is precisely what the definition of B+1(i, j) captures: it is 1 if and only if there exists a

k such that C+1(i, k, j) = 1, which, as argued above, holds if and only if there is a path of length at
most 2+1 from i to j. This completes the inductive step.

The crucial part is to construct a transformer that correctly operationalizes the computation of
predicates B and C. The input to the transformer is the adjacency matrix A represented using
n2 tokens from {0, 1}, followed by n3 padding tokens , and finally the source and target nodes
s, t  {1, . . . , n} represented in unary notation using special tokens a and b:

A1,1 . . . A1,n A2,1 . . . A2,n . . . . . . An,1 . . . An,n  . . . . . . . . .  a . . . . . . a b . . . . . . b

    n3                          s  t

Let N = n2 + n3 + s + t, the length of the input to the transformer. The first n2 token positions will
be used to compute predicates B, while the next n3 token positions will be used for predicates C.

Initial Layers. The transformer starts off by using layer 1 to store 1/N, n, n2, s, and t in the
residual stream at every position, as follows. The layer uses one head with uniform attention and with
value 1 only at the first token (recall that the position embedding is assumed to separate 1 from other
positions). This head computes 1/N and the layer adds (1/N ) to the residual stream. Note that the
input tokens in the first set of n2 positions, namely 0 and 1, are distinct from tokens in the rest of
the input. The layer, at every position, uses a second head with uniform attention, and with value 1
at tokens in {0, 1} and value 0 at all other tokens. This head computes n2/N . The layer now adds
(n2/N, 1/N ), where (a, b) is defined as the (unnormalized) vector a, b, -a, -b. When these
coordinates are later read from the residual stream via masked pre-norm, they will get normalized and
one would obtain (n2/N, 1/N ) = (n2). Thus, future layers will have access to (n2) through
the residual stream. The layer similarly uses three additional heads to compute n3/N , s/N , and
t/N . From the latter two values, it computes (s/N, 1/N ) and (t/N, 1/N ) and adds them to the
residual stream; as discussed above, these can be read in future layers as (s/N, 1/N ) = (s) and
(t/N, 1/N ) = (t). Finally, the layer computes (n3/N, n2/N ) and adds it to the residual stream.
Again, this will be available to future layers as (n3/N, n2/N ) = (n).

The transformer uses the next 15 layers to compute and store in the residual stream the semantic
"coordinates" of each of the first n2 + n3 token position as follows. For each of the first n2 positions

17
p = in + j with 1  p  n2, it uses Lemma 1 (7 layers) with ai set to p and m set n in order to
add (i) and (j) to the residual stream at position p. In parallel, for each of the next n3 positions
p = n2 + (in2 + kn + j) with n2 + 1  p  n2 + n3, it uses Lemma 1 with ai set to p and m set
n in order to add ((i + 1)n + k) and (j) to the residual stream. It then uses the lemma again (7
more layers), this time with ai set to (i + 1)n + k and m again set to n, to add (i + 1) and (k) to
the residual stream. Lastly, it uses Lemma 7 applied to (i + 1) to add (i) to the residual stream.

Layer 17 of the transformer computes the predicate B0(i, j) at the first n2 token positions as follows.

At position p = in + j, it uses Lemma 8 to compute I((A(i, j) = (1)) and I((i) = (j));
note that (A(i, j)), (i), and (j) are available in the residual stream at position p. It then uses a
feedforward layer to output 1 if both of these are 1, and output 0 otherwise. This is precisely the
intended value of B0(i, j). The sublayer then adds B0(i, j) to the residual stream. The layer also
adds to the residual stream the value 1, which will be used to initialize the boolean that controls layer
alternation in the repeated layers as discussed next.

Repeating Layers. The next set of layers alternates between computing the C and the B predicates
for   {1, . . . , log n}. To implement this, each position i at layer updates in the residual stream
the value of a single boolean r computed as follows. r is initially set to 1 at layer 8. Each repeating
layer retrieves r from the residual stream and adds 1 - r to the same coordinate in the residual stream.
The net effect is that the value of r alternates between 1 and 0 at the repeating layers. The transformer
uses this to alternate between the computation of the C and the B predicates.

For   {1, . . . , log n}, layer (2 - 1) + 8 of the transformer computes the predicate C(i, k, j) at

the set of n3 (padding) positions p = n2 + in2 + kn + j, as follows. It uses two heads, one with query
(i), (k) and the other with query (k), (j). The keys in the first n2 positions q = in + j
are set to (i), (j), and the values are set to B-1(i, j). The two heads thus attend solely to
positions with coordinates (i, k) and (k, j), respectively, and retrieve boolean values B-1(i, k) and
B-1(k, j), respectively, stored there in the previous layer. The layer then uses Lemma 8 to compute
I(B-1(i, k) = 1) and I(B-1(k, j) = 1), and uses a feedforward layer to output 1 if both of these
checks pass, and output 0 otherwise. This is precisely the intended value of C(i, k, j). If  > 1, the
layer replaces the value C-1(i, k, j) stored previously in the residual stream with the new boolean
value C(i, k, j) by adding C(i, k, j) - C-1(i, k, j) to the same coordinates of the residual stream.
If  = 1, it simply adds C(i, k, j) to the residual stream.

For   {1, . . . , log n}, layer 2 + 8 computes the predicate B(i, j) at the first n2 positions

p = in + j, as follows. It uses a head with query (i), (j). The keys in the second set of n3

positions q = n2 + in2 + kn + j are set to (i), (j) (recall that (i) and (j) are available

in the residual stream at q) and the corresponding values are set to the boolean C(i, k, j), stored

previously in the residual stream. The head thus attends uniformly to the n padding positions that have

coordinates (i, k, j) for various choices of k. It computes the average of their values, which equals
         n
h  =  1  k =1  C(i,  k,  j)  as  well  as  1/(2n)  using  an  additional  head.  We  observe  that  h    1/n
      n
if there exists a k such that C(i, k, j) = 1, and h = 0 otherwise. These conditions correspond

precisely to B(i, j) being 1 and 0, respectively. We compute h - 1/(2n) and store it in the residual

stream. Similar to the proof of Lemma 8, the feedforward layer reads  = sgn(h-1/(2n)), computes

z = (1 + ReLU())/2, and writes z to the residual stream. The value z is precisely the desired

B(i, j) as  is 1 when h  1/n and 0 when h = 0. As in Lemma 8, the intermediate value

h - 1/(2n) written to the residual stream can be recomputed and reset in the next layer. As before,

the transformer replaces the value B-1(i, j) stored previously in the residual stream with the newly

computed value B(i, j) by adding (B(i, j) - B-1(i, j)) to the stream at the same coordinates.

Final Layers. Finally, in layer 2log n + 18, the final token uses a head that attends with query
(s), (t) corresponding to the source and target nodes s and t mentioned in the input; recall that
(s) and (t) are available in the residual stream. The keys in the first n2 positions p = in + j
are, as before, set to (i), (j), and the values are set to Blog n(i, j) retrieved from the residual
stream. The head thus attends solely to the position with coordinates (s, t), and retrieves and outputs
the value Blog n(s, t). This value, as argued earlier, is 1 if and only if G has a path from s to t.

                                                          18
E Proofs for Width Scaling and Chain of Thought Claims

Theorem 3 (Width Scaling). Let T be a fixed-depth transformer whose width (model dimension or
padding tokens; Pfau et al., 2024) grows at most polynomial in n and whose weights on input length
n (to accommodate growing width) are computable in L. Then T can be simulated in L-uniform TC0.

Proof. By assumption, we can construct an L-uniform TC0 circuit family in which the transformer
weights for sequence length n are hardcoded as constants. Next, we can apply standard arguments
(Merrill et al., 2022; Merrill and Sabharwal, 2023a,b) to show that the self-attention and feedforward
sublayers can both be simulated by constant-depth threshold circuits, and the size remains polynomial
(though a larger polynomial). Thus, any function computable by a constant-depth, polynomial-width
transformer is in L-uniform TC0.

Theorem 4 (CoT Scaling). Transformers with O(log n) chain-of-thought steps can only recognize
languages in L-uniform TC0.

Proof. The high-level idea is that a polynomial-size circuit can enumerate all possible O(log n)-
length chains of thought. Then, in parallel for each chain of thought, we construct a threshold circuit
that simulates a transformer (Merrill and Sabharwal, 2023a) on the input concatenated with the chain
of thought, outputting the transformer's next token. We then select the chain of thought in which all
simulated outputs match the correct next token and output its final answer. The overall circuit has
constant depth, polynomial size, and can be shown to be L-uniform. Thus, any function computable
by a transformer with O(log n) chain of thought is in TC0.

F Experimental Details

Curriculum Training. In early experiments, we found that learning from long A5 sequences
directly was infeasible for our transformer models. We hypothesize this was because, unless earlier
tokens are predicted correctly, later tokens contribute significant noise to the gradient. In order to
make the learning problem feasible, we follow a curriculum training process, first training on A5
sequences of length 2, then length 4, and continuing up to some fixed maximum power 2i. We can
then measure the maximum n  2i such that the model achieves strong validation accuracy, as
mentioned in Section 7.

Depth Experiments. All depth experiments used a fixed width of 512. For historical reasons, we
have slightly different numbers of runs for different experimental conditions, and some of the runs use
different batch sizes (64 and 128). We originally ran a single sweep of depths and widths with 5 runs
for depths 6, 12, 18, and 24, each using a batch size of 64 and maximum depth of 2i = 128. Seeking
to clarify the trend between these original data points, we launched 3 additional runs at depths 9,
15, 18, and 21 using a batch size of 128, which anecdotally sped up training without harming final
performance. We also observed that the original depth 24 runs were at the ceiling n = 128, so we
launched 3 additional depth-24 runs with a batch size of 128 and 2i = 512 (we also used this larger
sequence length for all other runs in the second set). In total, this made:

        · 5 runs at depths 6, 12, and 8;
        · 3 runs at depths 9, 15, 18, and 21;
        · 8 runs at depth 24.

Width Experiments. All width experiments used a fixed depth of 6. We launched 5 runs at widths
128, 258, 512, 1024 with the same hyperparameters, each using a batch size of 64 and 2i = 128.

Compute. Each training run was launched on a single GPU. We estimate that, together, these
experiments took about 1000 GPU hours.

License. The codebase of Merrill et al. (2024), which we used for data generation, has MIT license.

                                                          19
NeurIPS Paper Checklist

       1. Claims

          Question: Do the main claims made in the abstract and introduction accurately reflect the
          paper's contributions and scope?

          Answer: [Yes]

          Justification: Sections 4 to 7 provide theoretical and empirical support for all claims.

          Guidelines:

              · The answer NA means that the abstract and introduction do not include the claims
                made in the paper.

              · The abstract and/or introduction should clearly state the claims made, including the
                contributions made in the paper and important assumptions and limitations. A No or
                NA answer to this question will not be perceived well by the reviewers.

              · The claims made should match theoretical and experimental results, and reflect how
                much the results can be expected to generalize to other settings.

              · It is fine to include aspirational goals as motivation as long as it is clear that these goals
                are not attained by the paper.

       2. Limitations

          Question: Does the paper discuss the limitations of the work performed by the authors?

          Answer: [Yes]

          Justification: Simplifying assumptions are discussed in Section 2.

          Guidelines:

              · The answer NA means that the paper has no limitation while the answer No means that
                the paper has limitations, but those are not discussed in the paper.

              · The authors are encouraged to create a separate "Limitations" section in their paper.
              · The paper should point out any strong assumptions and how robust the results are to

                violations of these assumptions (e.g., independence assumptions, noiseless settings,
                model well-specification, asymptotic approximations only holding locally). The authors
                should reflect on how these assumptions might be violated in practice and what the
                implications would be.
              · The authors should reflect on the scope of the claims made, e.g., if the approach was
                only tested on a few datasets or with a few runs. In general, empirical results often
                depend on implicit assumptions, which should be articulated.
              · The authors should reflect on the factors that influence the performance of the approach.
                For example, a facial recognition algorithm may perform poorly when image resolution
                is low or images are taken in low lighting. Or a speech-to-text system might not be
                used reliably to provide closed captions for online lectures because it fails to handle
                technical jargon.
              · The authors should discuss the computational efficiency of the proposed algorithms
                and how they scale with dataset size.
              · If applicable, the authors should discuss possible limitations of their approach to
                address problems of privacy and fairness.
              · While the authors might fear that complete honesty about limitations might be used by
                reviewers as grounds for rejection, a worse outcome might be that reviewers discover
                limitations that aren't acknowledged in the paper. The authors should use their best
                judgment and recognize that individual actions in favor of transparency play an impor-
                tant role in developing norms that preserve the integrity of the community. Reviewers
                will be specifically instructed to not penalize honesty concerning limitations.

       3. Theory Assumptions and Proofs

          Question: For each theoretical result, does the paper provide the full set of assumptions and
          a complete (and correct) proof?

          Answer: [Yes]

                                                          20
   Justification: All proofs are included either right next to the formal statements or in the
   appendix.

   Guidelines:

       · The answer NA means that the paper does not include theoretical results.
       · All the theorems, formulas, and proofs in the paper should be numbered and cross-

         referenced.
       · All assumptions should be clearly stated or referenced in the statement of any theorems.
       · The proofs can either appear in the main paper or the supplemental material, but if

         they appear in the supplemental material, the authors are encouraged to provide a short
         proof sketch to provide intuition.
       · Inversely, any informal proof provided in the core of the paper should be complemented
         by formal proofs provided in appendix or supplemental material.
       · Theorems and Lemmas that the proof relies upon should be properly referenced.

4. Experimental Result Reproducibility

   Question: Does the paper fully disclose all the information needed to reproduce the main ex-
   perimental results of the paper to the extent that it affects the main claims and/or conclusions
   of the paper (regardless of whether the code and data are provided or not)?

   Answer: [Yes]

   Justification: Sections F and 7 provide all key details of the experiments.

   Guidelines:

       · The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments.
       · If the paper includes experiments, a No answer to this question will not be perceived

         well by the reviewers: Making the paper reproducible is important, regardless of
         whether the code and data are provided or not.
       · If the contribution is a dataset and/or model, the authors should describe the steps taken
         to make their results reproducible or verifiable.
       · Depending on the contribution, reproducibility can be accomplished in various ways.
         For example, if the contribution is a novel architecture, describing the architecture fully
         might suffice, or if the contribution is a specific model and empirical evaluation, it may
         be necessary to either make it possible for others to replicate the model with the same
         dataset, or provide access to the model. In general. releasing code and data is often
         one good way to accomplish this, but reproducibility can also be provided via detailed
         instructions for how to replicate the results, access to a hosted model (e.g., in the case
         of a large language model), releasing of a model checkpoint, or other means that are
         appropriate to the research performed.
       · While NeurIPS does not require releasing code, the conference does require all submis-
         sions to provide some reasonable avenue for reproducibility, which may depend on the
         nature of the contribution. For example
         (a) If the contribution is primarily a new algorithm, the paper should make it clear how

              to reproduce that algorithm.
         (b) If the contribution is primarily a new model architecture, the paper should describe

              the architecture clearly and fully.
         (c) If the contribution is a new model (e.g., a large language model), then there should

              either be a way to access this model for reproducing the results or a way to reproduce
              the model (e.g., with an open-source dataset or instructions for how to construct
              the dataset).
         (d) We recognize that reproducibility may be tricky in some cases, in which case
              authors are welcome to describe the particular way they provide for reproducibility.
              In the case of closed-source models, it may be that access to the model is limited in
              some way (e.g., to registered users), but it should be possible for other researchers
              to have some path to reproducing or verifying the results.

5. Open access to data and code

   Question: Does the paper provide open access to the data and code, with sufficient instruc-
   tions to faithfully reproduce the main experimental results, as described in supplemental
   material?

                                                   21
   Answer: [Yes]

   Justification: As promised, we have updated the camera-ready version to point to the
   repository with code and data.

   Guidelines:

       · The answer NA means that paper does not include experiments requiring code.
       · Please see the NeurIPS code and data submission guidelines (https://nips.cc/

         public/guides/CodeSubmissionPolicy) for more details.
       · While we encourage the release of code and data, we understand that this might not be

         possible, so "No" is an acceptable answer. Papers cannot be rejected simply for not
         including code, unless this is central to the contribution (e.g., for a new open-source
         benchmark).
       · The instructions should contain the exact command and environment needed to run to
         reproduce the results. See the NeurIPS code and data submission guidelines (https:
         //nips.cc/public/guides/CodeSubmissionPolicy) for more details.
       · The authors should provide instructions on data access and preparation, including how
         to access the raw data, preprocessed data, intermediate data, and generated data, etc.
       · The authors should provide scripts to reproduce all experimental results for the new
         proposed method and baselines. If only a subset of experiments are reproducible, they
         should state which ones are omitted from the script and why.
       · At submission time, to preserve anonymity, the authors should release anonymized
         versions (if applicable).
       · Providing as much information as possible in supplemental material (appended to the
         paper) is recommended, but including URLs to data and code is permitted.

6. Experimental Setting/Details

   Question: Does the paper specify all the training and test details (e.g., data splits, hyper-
   parameters, how they were chosen, type of optimizer, etc.) necessary to understand the
   results?

   Answer: [Yes]

   Justification: Sections F and 7 provide all key details of the experiments.

   Guidelines:

       · The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments.
       · The experimental setting should be presented in the core of the paper to a level of detail

         that is necessary to appreciate the results and make sense of them.
       · The full details can be provided either with the code, in appendix, or as supplemental

         material.

7. Experiment Statistical Significance

   Question: Does the paper report error bars suitably and correctly defined or other appropriate
   information about the statistical significance of the experiments?

   Answer: [Yes]
   Justification: We include r2 as a measure of linear fit.

   Guidelines:

       · The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments.
       · The authors should answer "Yes" if the results are accompanied by error bars, confi-

         dence intervals, or statistical significance tests, at least for the experiments that support
         the main claims of the paper.
       · The factors of variability that the error bars are capturing should be clearly stated (for
         example, train/test split, initialization, random drawing of some parameter, or overall
         run with given experimental conditions).
       · The method for calculating the error bars should be explained (closed form formula,
         call to a library function, bootstrap, etc.)
       · The assumptions made should be given (e.g., Normally distributed errors).

                                                   22
        · It should be clear whether the error bar is the standard deviation or the standard error
           of the mean.

        · It is OK to report 1-sigma error bars, but one should state it. The authors should
           preferably report a 2-sigma error bar than state that they have a 96% CI, if the hypothesis
           of Normality of errors is not verified.

        · For asymmetric distributions, the authors should be careful not to show in tables or
           figures symmetric error bars that would yield results that are out of range (e.g. negative
           error rates).

        · If error bars are reported in tables or plots, The authors should explain in the text how
           they were calculated and reference the corresponding figures or tables in the text.

 8. Experiments Compute Resources

     Question: For each experiment, does the paper provide sufficient information on the com-
     puter resources (type of compute workers, memory, time of execution) needed to reproduce
     the experiments?

     Answer: [Yes]

     Justification: Provided in Section F.

     Guidelines:

        · The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments.
        · The paper should indicate the type of compute workers CPU or GPU, internal cluster,

           or cloud provider, including relevant memory and storage.
        · The paper should provide the amount of compute required for each of the individual

           experimental runs as well as estimate the total compute.
        · The paper should disclose whether the full research project required more compute

           than the experiments reported in the paper (e.g., preliminary or failed experiments that
           didn't make it into the paper).

 9. Code Of Ethics

     Question: Does the research conducted in the paper conform, in every respect, with the
     NeurIPS Code of Ethics https://neurips.cc/public/EthicsGuidelines?

     Answer: [Yes]

     Justification: No special circumstances.

     Guidelines:

        · The answer NA means that the authors have not reviewed the NeurIPS Code of Ethics.
        · If the authors answer No, they should explain the special circumstances that require a

           deviation from the Code of Ethics.
        · The authors should make sure to preserve anonymity (e.g., if there is a special consid-

           eration due to laws or regulations in their jurisdiction).

10. Broader Impacts

     Question: Does the paper discuss both potential positive societal impacts and negative
     societal impacts of the work performed?

     Answer: [NA]

     Justification: The contribution of this work is foundational understanding of the computa-
     tional power of transformers.

     Guidelines:

        · The answer NA means that there is no societal impact of the work performed.
        · If the authors answer NA or No, they should explain why their work has no societal

           impact or why the paper does not address societal impact.
        · Examples of negative societal impacts include potential malicious or unintended uses

           (e.g., disinformation, generating fake profiles, surveillance), fairness considerations
           (e.g., deployment of technologies that could make decisions that unfairly impact specific
           groups), privacy considerations, and security considerations.

                                                     23
        · The conference expects that many papers will be foundational research and not tied
           to particular applications, let alone deployments. However, if there is a direct path to
           any negative applications, the authors should point it out. For example, it is legitimate
           to point out that an improvement in the quality of generative models could be used to
           generate deepfakes for disinformation. On the other hand, it is not needed to point out
           that a generic algorithm for optimizing neural networks could enable people to train
           models that generate Deepfakes faster.

        · The authors should consider possible harms that could arise when the technology is
           being used as intended and functioning correctly, harms that could arise when the
           technology is being used as intended but gives incorrect results, and harms following
           from (intentional or unintentional) misuse of the technology.

        · If there are negative societal impacts, the authors could also discuss possible mitigation
           strategies (e.g., gated release of models, providing defenses in addition to attacks,
           mechanisms for monitoring misuse, mechanisms to monitor how a system learns from
           feedback over time, improving the efficiency and accessibility of ML).

11. Safeguards

     Question: Does the paper describe safeguards that have been put in place for responsible
     release of data or models that have a high risk for misuse (e.g., pretrained language models,
     image generators, or scraped datasets)?

     Answer: [NA]

     Justification: The paper poses no such risks.

     Guidelines:

        · The answer NA means that the paper poses no such risks.
        · Released models that have a high risk for misuse or dual-use should be released with

           necessary safeguards to allow for controlled use of the model, for example by requiring
           that users adhere to usage guidelines or restrictions to access the model or implementing
           safety filters.
        · Datasets that have been scraped from the Internet could pose safety risks. The authors
           should describe how they avoided releasing unsafe images.
        · We recognize that providing effective safeguards is challenging, and many papers do
           not require this, but we encourage authors to take this into account and make a best
           faith effort.

12. Licenses for existing assets

     Question: Are the creators or original owners of assets (e.g., code, data, models), used in
     the paper, properly credited and are the license and terms of use explicitly mentioned and
     properly respected?

     Answer: [Yes]

     Justification: Cited and acknowledged license for synthetic data codebase in Section F.

     Guidelines:

        · The answer NA means that the paper does not use existing assets.
        · The authors should cite the original paper that produced the code package or dataset.
        · The authors should state which version of the asset is used and, if possible, include a

           URL.
        · The name of the license (e.g., CC-BY 4.0) should be included for each asset.
        · For scraped data from a particular source (e.g., website), the copyright and terms of

           service of that source should be provided.
        · If assets are released, the license, copyright information, and terms of use in the

           package should be provided. For popular datasets, paperswithcode.com/datasets
           has curated licenses for some datasets. Their licensing guide can help determine the
           license of a dataset.
        · For existing datasets that are re-packaged, both the original license and the license of
           the derived asset (if it has changed) should be provided.

                                                     24
        · If this information is not available online, the authors are encouraged to reach out to
           the asset's creators.

13. New Assets

     Question: Are new assets introduced in the paper well documented and is the documentation
     provided alongside the assets?

     Answer: [NA]

     Justification: The paper did not introduce any new assets.

     Guidelines:

        · The answer NA means that the paper does not release new assets.
        · Researchers should communicate the details of the dataset/code/model as part of their

           submissions via structured templates. This includes details about training, license,
           limitations, etc.
        · The paper should discuss whether and how consent was obtained from people whose
           asset is used.
        · At submission time, remember to anonymize your assets (if applicable). You can either
           create an anonymized URL or include an anonymized zip file.

14. Crowdsourcing and Research with Human Subjects

     Question: For crowdsourcing experiments and research with human subjects, does the paper
     include the full text of instructions given to participants and screenshots, if applicable, as
     well as details about compensation (if any)?

     Answer: [NA]

     Justification: Did not involve research with human subjects.

     Guidelines:

        · The answer NA means that the paper does not involve crowdsourcing nor research with
           human subjects.

        · Including this information in the supplemental material is fine, but if the main contribu-
           tion of the paper involves human subjects, then as much detail as possible should be
           included in the main paper.

        · According to the NeurIPS Code of Ethics, workers involved in data collection, curation,
           or other labor should be paid at least the minimum wage in the country of the data
           collector.

15. Institutional Review Board (IRB) Approvals or Equivalent for Research with Human
     Subjects

     Question: Does the paper describe potential risks incurred by study participants, whether
     such risks were disclosed to the subjects, and whether Institutional Review Board (IRB)
     approvals (or an equivalent approval/review based on the requirements of your country or
     institution) were obtained?

     Answer: [NA]

     Justification: Did not involve research with human subjects.

     Guidelines:

        · The answer NA means that the paper does not involve crowdsourcing nor research with
           human subjects.

        · Depending on the country in which research is conducted, IRB approval (or equivalent)
           may be required for any human subjects research. If you obtained IRB approval, you
           should clearly state this in the paper.

        · We recognize that the procedures for this may vary significantly between institutions
           and locations, and we expect authors to adhere to the NeurIPS Code of Ethics and the
           guidelines for their institution.

        · For initial submissions, do not include any information that would break anonymity (if
           applicable), such as the institution conducting the review.

                                                     25
